{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}}
{\*\generator Msftedit 5.41.15.1515;}\viewkind4\uc1\pard\f0\fs20\par
The Club of Queer Trades\par
\par
by\par
\par
G.K.Chesterton\par
\par
Chapter 1\par
\par
The Tremendous Adventures of Major Brown\par
\par
Rabelais, or his wild illustrator Gustave Dore, must have had something to\par
do with the designing of the things called flats in England and America.\par
There is something entirely Gargantuan in the idea of economising\par
space by piling houses on top of each other, front doors and all.\par
And in the chaos and complexity of those perpendicular streets\par
anything may dwell or happen, and it is in one of them, I believe,\par
that the inquirer may find the offices of the Club of Queer Trades.\par
It may be thought at the first glance that the name would attract\par
and startle the passer-by, but nothing attracts or startles in\par
these dim immense hives.  The passer-by is only looking for his own\par
melancholy destination, the Montenegro Shipping Agency or the London\par
office of the Rutland Sentinel, and passes through the twilight\par
passages as one passes through the twilight corridors of a dream.\par
If the Thugs set up a Strangers' Assassination Company in one\par
of the great buildings in Norfolk Street, and sent in a mild man\par
in spectacles to answer inquiries, no inquiries would be made.\par
And the Club of Queer Trades reigns in a great edifice hidden\par
like a fossil in a mighty cliff of fossils.\par
\par
The nature of this society, such as we afterwards discovered it to be,\par
is soon and simply told.  It is an eccentric and Bohemian Club,\par
of which the absolute condition of membership lies in this, that the\par
candidate must have invented the method by which he earns his living.\par
It must be an entirely new trade.  The exact definition of this\par
requirement is given in the two principal rules.  First, it must\par
not be a mere application or variation of an existing trade.\par
Thus, for instance, the Club would not admit an insurance agent\par
simply because instead of insuring men's furniture against being\par
burnt in a fire, he insured, let us say, their trousers against being\par
torn by a mad dog.  The principle (as Sir Bradcock Burnaby-Bradcock,\par
in the extraordinarily eloquent and soaring speech to the club on\par
the occasion of the question being raised in the Stormby Smith affair,\par
said wittily and keenly) is the same.  Secondly, the trade must be\par
a genuine commercial source of income, the support of its inventor.\par
Thus the Club would not receive a man simply because he chose to pass\par
his days collecting broken sardine tins, unless he could drive\par
a roaring trade in them.  Professor Chick made that quite clear.\par
And when one remembers what Professor Chick's own new trade was,\par
one doesn't know whether to laugh or cry.\par
\par
The discovery of this strange society was a curiously refreshing thing;\par
to realize that there were ten new trades in the world was like\par
looking at the first ship or the first plough.  It made a man feel\par
what he should feel, that he was still in the childhood of the world.\par
That I should have come at last upon so singular a body was,\par
I may say without vanity, not altogether singular, for I\par
have a mania for belonging to as many societies as possible:\par
I may be said to collect clubs, and I have accumulated a vast and\par
fantastic variety of specimens ever since, in my audacious youth,\par
I collected the Athenaeum.  At some future day, perhaps, I may\par
tell tales of some of the other bodies to which I have belonged.\par
I will recount the doings of the Dead Man's Shoes Society\par
(that superficially immoral, but darkly justifiable communion);\par
I will explain the curious origin of the Cat and Christian,\par
the name of which has been so shamefully misinterpreted;\par
and the world shall know at last why the Institute of Typewriters\par
coalesced with the Red Tulip League.  Of the Ten Teacups, of course\par
I dare not say a word.  The first of my revelations, at any rate,\par
shall be concerned with the Club of Queer Trades, which, as I\par
have said, was one of this class, one which I was almost bound\par
to come across sooner or later, because of my singular hobby.\par
The wild youth of the metropolis call me facetiously `The King of Clubs'.\par
They also call me `The Cherub', in allusion to the roseate and youthful\par
appearance I have presented in my declining years.  I only hope\par
the spirits in the better world have as good dinners as I have.\par
But the finding of the Club of Queer Trades has one very curious thing\par
about it.  The most curious thing about it is that it was not discovered\par
by me; it was discovered by my friend Basil Grant, a star-gazer,\par
a mystic, and a man who scarcely stirred out of his attic.\par
\par
Very few people knew anything of Basil; not because he was in\par
the least unsociable, for if a man out of the street had walked\par
into his rooms he would have kept him talking till morning.\par
Few people knew him, because, like all poets, he could do without them;\par
he welcomed a human face as he might welcome a sudden blend\par
of colour in a sunset; but he no more felt the need of going out\par
to parties than he felt the need of altering the sunset clouds.\par
He lived in a queer and comfortable garret in the roofs of Lambeth.\par
He was surrounded by a chaos of things that were in odd contrast\par
to the slums around him; old fantastic books, swords, armour--the whole\par
dust-hole of romanticism.  But his face, amid all these quixotic relics,\par
appeared curiously keen and modern--a powerful, legal face.\par
And no one but I knew who he was.\par
\par
Long ago as it is, everyone remembers the terrible and grotesque\par
scene that occurred in--, when one of the most acute and\par
forcible of the English judges suddenly went mad on the bench.\par
I had my own view of that occurrence; but about the facts themselves\par
there is no question at all.  For some months, indeed for some years,\par
people had detected something curious in the judge's conduct.\par
He seemed to have lost interest in the law, in which he had been\par
beyond expression brilliant and terrible as a K.C., and to be occupied\par
in giving personal and moral advice to the people concerned.\par
He talked more like a priest or a doctor, and a very outspoken\par
one at that.  The first thrill was probably given when he said\par
to a man who had attempted a crime of passion:  "I sentence\par
you to three years imprisonment, under the firm, and solemn,\par
and God-given conviction, that what you require is three months\par
at the seaside."  He accused criminals from the bench, not so much\par
of their obvious legal crimes, but of things that had never been\par
heard of in a court of justice, monstrous egoism, lack of humour,\par
and morbidity deliberately encouraged.  Things came to a head\par
in that celebrated diamond case in which the Prime Minister himself,\par
that brilliant patrician, had to come forward, gracefully and reluctantly,\par
to give evidence against his valet.  After the detailed life\par
of the household had been thoroughly exhibited, the judge requested\par
the Premier again to step forward, which he did with quiet dignity.\par
The judge then said, in a sudden, grating voice:  "Get a new soul.\par
That thing's not fit for a dog.  Get a new soul."  All this, of course,\par
in the eyes of the sagacious, was premonitory of that melancholy\par
and farcical day when his wits actually deserted him in open court.\par
It was a libel case between two very eminent and powerful financiers,\par
against both of whom charges of considerable defalcation were brought.\par
The case was long and complex; the advocates were long and eloquent;\par
but at last, after weeks of work and rhetoric, the time came\par
for the great judge to give a summing-up; and one of his celebrated\par
masterpieces of lucidity and pulverizing logic was eagerly looked for.\par
He had spoken very little during the prolonged affair, and he looked\par
sad and lowering at the end of it.  He was silent for a few moments,\par
and then burst into a stentorian song.  His remarks (as reported)\par
were as follows:\par
\par
"O Rowty-owty tiddly-owty Tiddly-owty tiddly-owty Highty-ighty\par
tiddly-ighty Tiddly-ighty ow."\par
\par
He then retired from public life and took the garret in Lambeth.\par
\par
I was sitting there one evening, about six o'clock, over a glass of that\par
gorgeous Burgundy which he kept behind a pile of black-letter folios;\par
he was striding about the room, fingering, after a habit of his,\par
one of the great swords in his collection; the red glare of the\par
strong fire struck his square features and his fierce grey hair;\par
his blue eyes were even unusually full of dreams, and he had\par
opened his mouth to speak dreamily, when the door was flung open,\par
and a pale, fiery man, with red hair and a huge furred overcoat,\par
swung himself panting into the room.\par
\par
"Sorry to bother you, Basil," he gasped.  "I took a liberty--\par
made an appointment here with a man--a client--in five minutes--\par
I beg your pardon, sir," and he gave me a bow of apology.\par
\par
Basil smiled at me.  "You didn't know," he said, "that I had a\par
practical brother.  This is Rupert Grant, Esquire, who can and does\par
all there is to be done.  Just as I was a failure at one thing,\par
he is a success at everything.  I remember him as a journalist,\par
a house-agent, a naturalist, an inventor, a publisher,\par
a schoolmaster, a--what are you now, Rupert?"\par
\par
"I am and have been for some time," said Rupert, with some dignity,\par
"a private detective, and there's my client."\par
\par
A loud rap at the door had cut him short, and, on permission being given,\par
the door was thrown sharply open and a stout, dapper man walked swiftly\par
into the room, set his silk hat with a clap on the table, and said,\par
"Good evening, gentlemen," with a stress on the last syllable that\par
somehow marked him out as a martinet, military, literary and social.\par
He had a large head streaked with black and grey, and an abrupt\par
black moustache, which gave him a look of fierceness which was\par
contradicted by his sad sea-blue eyes.\par
\par
Basil immediately said to me, "Let us come into the next room, Gully,"\par
and was moving towards the door, but the stranger said:\par
\par
"Not at all.  Friends remain.  Assistance possibly."\par
\par
The moment I heard him speak I remembered who he was,\par
a certain Major Brown I had met years before in Basil's society.\par
I had forgotten altogether the black dandified figure and the large\par
solemn head, but I remembered the peculiar speech, which consisted\par
of only saying about a quarter of each sentence, and that sharply,\par
like the crack of a gun.  I do not know, it may have come from giving\par
orders to troops.\par
\par
Major Brown was a V.C., and an able and distinguished soldier,\par
but he was anything but a warlike person.  Like many among the iron\par
men who recovered British India, he was a man with the natural\par
beliefs and tastes of an old maid.  In his dress he was dapper\par
and yet demure; in his habits he was precise to the point\par
of the exact adjustment of a tea-cup. One enthusiasm he had,\par
which was of the nature of a religion--the cultivation of pansies.\par
And when he talked about his collection, his blue eyes glittered\par
like a child's at a new toy, the eyes that had remained untroubled\par
when the troops were roaring victory round Roberts at Candahar.\par
\par
"Well, Major," said Rupert Grant, with a lordly heartiness,\par
flinging himself into a chair, "what is the matter with you?"\par
\par
"Yellow pansies.  Coal-cellar. P. G. Northover," said the Major,\par
with righteous indignation.\par
\par
We glanced at each other with inquisitiveness.  Basil, who had his\par
eyes shut in his abstracted way, said simply:\par
\par
"I beg your pardon."\par
\par
"Fact is.  Street, you know, man, pansies.  On wall.\par
Death to me.  Something.  Preposterous."\par
\par
We shook our heads gently.  Bit by bit, and mainly by\par
the seemingly sleepy assistance of Basil Grant, we pieced\par
together the Major's fragmentary, but excited narration.\par
It would be infamous to submit the reader to what we endured;\par
therefore I will tell the story of Major Brown in my own words.\par
But the reader must imagine the scene.  The eyes of Basil closed\par
as in a trance, after his habit, and the eyes of Rupert and myself\par
getting rounder and rounder as we listened to one of the most astounding\par
stories in the world, from the lips of the little man in black,\par
sitting bolt upright in his chair and talking like a telegram.\par
\par
Major Brown was, I have said, a successful soldier, but by no\par
means an enthusiastic one.  So far from regretting his retirement\par
on half-pay, it was with delight that he took a small neat villa,\par
very like a doll's house, and devoted the rest of his life\par
to pansies and weak tea.  The thought that battles were over\par
when he had once hung up his sword in the little front hall\par
(along with two patent stew-pots and a bad water-colour),\par
and betaken himself instead to wielding the rake in his little\par
sunlit garden, was to him like having come into a harbour in heaven.\par
He was Dutch-like and precise in his taste in gardening,\par
and had, perhaps, some tendency to drill his flowers like soldiers.\par
He was one of those men who are capable of putting four umbrellas\par
in the stand rather than three, so that two may lean one way and\par
two another; he saw life like a pattern in a freehand drawing-book.\par
And assuredly he would not have believed, or even understood,\par
any one who had told him that within a few yards of his brick paradise\par
he was destined to be caught in a whirlpool of incredible adventure,\par
such as he had never seen or dreamed of in the horrible jungle,\par
or the heat of battle.\par
\par
One certain bright and windy afternoon, the Major, attired in his\par
usual faultless manner, had set out for his usual constitutional.\par
In crossing from one great residential thoroughfare to another,\par
he happened to pass along one of those aimless-looking lanes\par
which lie along the back-garden walls of a row of mansions,\par
and which in their empty and discoloured appearance give one\par
an odd sensation as of being behind the scenes of a theatre.\par
But mean and sulky as the scene might be in the eyes of most of us,\par
it was not altogether so in the Major's, for along the coarse\par
gravel footway was coming a thing which was to him what\par
the passing of a religious procession is to a devout person.\par
A large, heavy man, with fish-blue eyes and a ring of irradiating\par
red beard, was pushing before him a barrow, which was ablaze\par
with incomparable flowers.  There were splendid specimens of almost\par
every order, but the Major's own favourite pansies predominated.\par
The Major stopped and fell into conversation, and then into bargaining.\par
He treated the man after the manner of collectors and other\par
mad men, that is to say, he carefully and with a sort of anguish\par
selected the best roots from the less excellent, praised some,\par
disparaged others, made a subtle scale ranging from a thrilling worth\par
and rarity to a degraded insignificance, and then bought them all.\par
The man was just pushing off his barrow when he stopped and came\par
close to the Major.\par
\par
"I'll tell you what, sir," he said.  "If you're interested in them things,\par
you just get on to that wall."\par
\par
"On the wall!" cried the scandalised Major, whose conventional soul\par
quailed within him at the thought of such fantastic trespass.\par
\par
"Finest show of yellow pansies in England in that there garden, sir,"\par
hissed the tempter.  "I'll help you up, sir."\par
\par
How it happened no one will ever know but that positive enthusiasm\par
of the Major's life triumphed over all its negative traditions,\par
and with an easy leap and swing that showed that he was in no\par
need of physical assistance, he stood on the wall at the end\par
of the strange garden.  The second after, the flapping of\par
the frock-coat at his knees made him feel inexpressibly a fool.\par
But the next instant all such trifling sentiments were swallowed up\par
by the most appalling shock of surprise the old soldier had ever\par
felt in all his bold and wandering existence.  His eyes fell upon\par
the garden, and there across a large bed in the centre of the lawn\par
was a vast pattern of pansies; they were splendid flowers, but for once\par
it was not their horticultural aspects that Major Brown beheld,\par
for the pansies were arranged in gigantic capital letters so as to\par
form the sentence:\par
\par
DEATH TO MAJOR BROWN\par
\par
A kindly looking old man, with white whiskers, was watering them.\par
Brown looked sharply back at the road behind him; the man with the barrow\par
had suddenly vanished.  Then he looked again at the lawn with its\par
incredible inscription.  Another man might have thought he had gone mad,\par
but Brown did not.  When romantic ladies gushed over his V.C. and\par
his military exploits, he sometimes felt himself to be a painfully\par
prosaic person, but by the same token he knew he was incurably sane.\par
Another man, again, might have thought himself a victim of a\par
passing practical joke, but Brown could not easily believe this.\par
He knew from his own quaint learning that the garden arrangement was\par
an elaborate and expensive one; he thought it extravagantly improbable\par
that any one would pour out money like water for a joke against him.\par
Having no explanation whatever to offer, he admitted the fact\par
to himself, like a clear-headed man, and waited as he would have\par
done in the presence of a man with six legs.\par
\par
At this moment the stout old man with white whiskers looked up,\par
and the watering can fell from his hand, shooting a swirl of water\par
down the gravel path.\par
\par
"Who on earth are you?" he gasped, trembling violently.\par
\par
"I am Major Brown," said that individual, who was always cool\par
in the hour of action.\par
\par
The old man gaped helplessly like some monstrous fish.\par
At last he stammered wildly, "Come down--come down here!"\par
\par
"At your service," said the Major, and alighted at a bound on\par
the grass beside him, without disarranging his silk hat.\par
\par
The old man turned his broad back and set off at a sort of waddling\par
run towards the house, followed with swift steps by the Major.\par
His guide led him through the back passages of a gloomy, but gorgeously\par
appointed house, until they reached the door of the front room.\par
Then the old man turned with a face of apoplectic terror dimly\par
showing in the twilight.\par
\par
"For heaven's sake," he said, "don't mention jackals."\par
\par
Then he threw open the door, releasing a burst of red lamplight,\par
and ran downstairs with a clatter.\par
\par
The Major stepped into a rich, glowing room, full of red copper,\par
and peacock and purple hangings, hat in hand.  He had the finest\par
manners in the world, and, though mystified, was not in the least\par
embarrassed to see that the only occupant was a lady, sitting by\par
the window, looking out.\par
\par
"Madam," he said, bowing simply, "I am Major Brown."\par
\par
"Sit down," said the lady; but she did not turn her head.\par
\par
She was a graceful, green-clad figure, with fiery red hair and a flavour\par
of Bedford Park.  "You have come, I suppose," she said mournfully,\par
"to tax me about the hateful title-deeds."\par
\par
"I have come, madam," he said, "to know what is the matter.\par
To know why my name is written across your garden.\par
Not amicably either."\par
\par
He spoke grimly, for the thing had hit him.  It is impossible\par
to describe the effect produced on the mind by that quiet and sunny\par
garden scene, the frame for a stunning and brutal personality.\par
The evening air was still, and the grass was golden in the place\par
where the little flowers he studied cried to heaven for his blood.\par
\par
"You know I must not turn round," said the lady; "every afternoon\par
till the stroke of six I must keep my face turned to the street."\par
\par
Some queer and unusual inspiration made the prosaic soldier resolute\par
to accept these outrageous riddles without surprise.\par
\par
"It is almost six," he said; and even as he spoke the barbaric\par
copper clock upon the wall clanged the first stroke of the hour.\par
At the sixth the lady sprang up and turned on the Major one\par
of the queerest and yet most attractive faces he had ever seen\par
in his life; open, and yet tantalising, the face of an elf.\par
\par
"That makes the third year I have waited," she cried.\par
"This is an anniversary.  The waiting almost makes one wish\par
the frightful thing would happen once and for all."\par
\par
And even as she spoke, a sudden rending cry broke the stillness.\par
From low down on the pavement of the dim street (it was already twilight)\par
a voice cried out with a raucous and merciless distinctness:\par
\par
"Major Brown, Major Brown, where does the jackal dwell?"\par
\par
Brown was decisive and silent in action.  He strode to the front door and\par
looked out.  There was no sign of life in the blue gloaming of the street,\par
where one or two lamps were beginning to light their lemon sparks.\par
On returning, he found the lady in green trembling.\par
\par
"It is the end," she cried, with shaking lips; "it may be death\par
for both of us.  Whenever--"\par
\par
But even as she spoke her speech was cloven by another hoarse\par
proclamation from the dark street, again horribly articulate.\par
\par
"Major Brown, Major Brown, how did the jackal die?"\par
\par
Brown dashed out of the door and down the steps, but again\par
he was frustrated; there was no figure in sight, and the street\par
was far too long and empty for the shouter to have run away.\par
Even the rational Major was a little shaken as he returned in a\par
certain time to the drawing-room. Scarcely had he done so than\par
the terrific voice came:\par
\par
"Major Brown, Major Brown, where did--"\par
\par
Brown was in the street almost at a bound, and he was in time--\par
in time to see something which at first glance froze the blood.\par
The cries appeared to come from a decapitated head resting\par
on the pavement.\par
\par
The next moment the pale Major understood.  It was the head of a man\par
thrust through the coal-hole in the street.  The next moment,\par
again, it had vanished, and Major Brown turned to the lady.\par
"Where's your coal-cellar?" he said, and stepped out into the passage.\par
\par
She looked at him with wild grey eyes.  "You will not go down,"\par
she cried, "alone, into the dark hole, with that beast?"\par
\par
"Is this the way?" replied Brown, and descended the kitchen\par
stairs three at a time.  He flung open the door of a black\par
cavity and stepped in, feeling in his pocket for matches.\par
As his right hand was thus occupied, a pair of great slimy hands\par
came out of the darkness, hands clearly belonging to a man\par
of gigantic stature, and seized him by the back of the head.\par
They forced him down, down in the suffocating darkness, a brutal\par
image of destiny.  But the Major's head, though upside down,\par
was perfectly clear and intellectual.  He gave quietly under\par
the pressure until he had slid down almost to his hands and knees.\par
Then finding the knees of the invisible monster within a foot of him,\par
he simply put out one of his long, bony, and skilful hands,\par
and gripping the leg by a muscle pulled it off the ground\par
and laid the huge living man, with a crash, along the floor.\par
He strove to rise, but Brown was on top like a cat.\par
They rolled over and over.  Big as the man was, he had evidently\par
now no desire but to escape; he made sprawls hither and thither\par
to get past the Major to the door, but that tenacious person had him\par
hard by the coat collar and hung with the other hand to a beam.\par
At length there came a strain in holding back this human bull, a strain\par
under which Brown expected his hand to rend and part from the arm.\par
But something else rent and parted; and the dim fat figure of the giant\par
vanished out of the cellar, leaving the torn coat in the Major's hand;\par
the only fruit of his adventure and the only clue to the mystery.\par
For when he went up and out at the front door, the lady, the rich\par
hangings, and the whole equipment of the house had disappeared.\par
It had only bare boards and whitewashed walls.\par
\par
"The lady was in the conspiracy, of course," said Rupert, nodding.\par
Major Brown turned brick red.  "I beg your pardon," he said,\par
"I think not."\par
\par
Rupert raised his eyebrows and looked at him for a moment,\par
but said nothing.  When next he spoke he asked:\par
\par
"Was there anything in the pockets of the coat?"\par
\par
"There was sevenpence halfpenny in coppers and a threepenny-bit,"\par
said the Major carefully; "there was a cigarette-holder,\par
a piece of string, and this letter," and he laid it on the table.\par
It ran as follows:\par
\par
Dear Mr Plover,\par
\par
I am annoyed to hear that some delay has occurred in the arrangements\par
re Major Brown.  Please see that he is attacked as per arrangement\par
tomorrow The coal-cellar, of course.\par
\par
Yours faithfully, P. G. Northover.\par
\par
Rupert Grant was leaning forward listening with hawk-like eyes.\par
He cut in:\par
\par
"Is it dated from anywhere?"\par
\par
"No--oh, yes!" replied Brown, glancing upon the paper;\par
"14 Tanner's Court, North--"\par
\par
Rupert sprang up and struck his hands together.\par
\par
"Then why are we hanging here?  Let's get along.  Basil, lend\par
me your revolver."\par
\par
Basil was staring into the embers like a man in a trance;\par
and it was some time before he answered:\par
\par
"I don't think you'll need it."\par
\par
"Perhaps not," said Rupert, getting into his fur coat.  "One never knows.\par
But going down a dark court to see criminals--"\par
\par
"Do you think they are criminals?" asked his brother.\par
\par
Rupert laughed stoutly.  "Giving orders to a subordinate to strangle\par
a harmless stranger in a coal-cellar may strike you as a very\par
blameless experiment, but--"\par
\par
"Do you think they wanted to strangle the Major?" asked Basil,\par
in the same distant and monotonous voice.\par
\par
"My dear fellow, you've been asleep.  Look at the letter."\par
\par
"I am looking at the letter," said the mad judge calmly; though, as a\par
matter of fact, he was looking at the fire.  "I don't think it's\par
the sort of letter one criminal would write to another."\par
\par
"My dear boy, you are glorious," cried Rupert, turning round,\par
with laughter in his blue bright eyes.  "Your methods amaze me.\par
Why, there is the letter.  It is written, and it does give orders\par
for a crime.  You might as well say that the Nelson Column\par
was not at all the sort of thing that was likely to be set up\par
in Trafalgar Square."\par
\par
Basil Grant shook all over with a sort of silent laughter, but did\par
not otherwise move.\par
\par
"That's rather good," he said; "but, of course, logic like that's\par
not what is really wanted.  It's a question of spiritual atmosphere.\par
It's not a criminal letter."\par
\par
"It is.  It's a matter of fact," cried the other in an\par
agony of reasonableness.\par
\par
"Facts," murmured Basil, like one mentioning some strange,\par
far-off animals, "how facts obscure the truth.  I may be silly--\par
in fact, I'm off my head--but I never could believe in that man--\par
what's his name, in those capital stories?--Sherlock Holmes.\par
Every detail points to something, certainly; but generally to\par
the wrong thing.  Facts point in all directions, it seems to me,\par
like the thousands of twigs on a tree.  It's only the life of the tree\par
that has unity and goes up--only the green blood that springs,\par
like a fountain, at the stars."\par
\par
"But what the deuce else can the letter be but criminal?"\par
\par
"We have eternity to stretch our legs in," replied the mystic.\par
"It can be an infinity of things.  I haven't seen any of them--\par
I've only seen the letter.  I look at that, and say it's not criminal."\par
\par
"Then what's the origin of it?"\par
\par
"I haven't the vaguest idea."\par
\par
"Then why don't you accept the ordinary explanation?"\par
\par
Basil continued for a little to glare at the coals, and seemed\par
collecting his thoughts in a humble and even painful way.\par
Then he said:\par
\par
"Suppose you went out into the moonlight.  Suppose you passed\par
through silent, silvery streets and squares until you came into\par
an open and deserted space, set with a few monuments, and you\par
beheld one dressed as a ballet girl dancing in the argent glimmer.\par
And suppose you looked, and saw it was a man disguised.\par
And suppose you looked again, and saw it was Lord Kitchener.\par
What would you think?"\par
\par
He paused a moment, and went on:\par
\par
"You could not adopt the ordinary explanation.  The ordinary\par
explanation of putting on singular clothes is that you look\par
nice in them; you would not think that Lord Kitchener dressed\par
up like a ballet girl out of ordinary personal vanity.\par
You would think it much more likely that he inherited a dancing\par
madness from a great grandmother; or had been hypnotised at a seance;\par
or threatened by a secret society with death if he refused the ordeal.\par
With Baden-Powell, say, it might be a bet--but not with Kitchener.\par
I should know all that, because in my public days I knew him quite well.\par
So I know that letter quite well, and criminals quite well.\par
It's not a criminal's letter.  It's all atmospheres."\par
And he closed his eyes and passed his hand over his forehead.\par
\par
Rupert and the Major were regarding him with a mixture of respect\par
and pity.  The former said,\par
\par
"Well, I'm going, anyhow, and shall continue to think--until your\par
spiritual mystery turns up--that a man who sends a note recommending\par
a crime, that is, actually a crime that is actually carried out,\par
at least tentatively, is, in all probability, a little casual\par
in his moral tastes.  Can I have that revolver?"\par
\par
"Certainly," said Basil, getting up.  "But I am coming with you."\par
And he flung an old cape or cloak round him, and took a sword-stick\par
from the corner.\par
\par
"You!" said Rupert, with some surprise, "you scarcely ever leave\par
your hole to look at anything on the face of the earth."\par
\par
Basil fitted on a formidable old white hat.\par
\par
"I scarcely ever," he said, with an unconscious and colossal arrogance,\par
"hear of anything on the face of the earth that I do not understand\par
at once, without going to see it."\par
\par
And he led the way out into the purple night.\par
\par
We four swung along the flaring Lambeth streets, across\par
Westminster Bridge, and along the Embankment in the direction\par
of that part of Fleet Street which contained Tanner's Court.\par
The erect, black figure of Major Brown, seen from behind, was a quaint\par
contrast to the hound-like stoop and flapping mantle of young\par
Rupert Grant, who adopted, with childlike delight, all the dramatic\par
poses of the detective of fiction.  The finest among his many fine\par
qualities was his boyish appetite for the colour and poetry of London.\par
Basil, who walked behind, with his face turned blindly to the stars,\par
had the look of a somnambulist.\par
\par
Rupert paused at the corner of Tanner's Court, with a quiver of delight\par
at danger, and gripped Basil's revolver in his great-coat pocket.\par
\par
"Shall we go in now?" he asked.\par
\par
"Not get police?" asked Major Brown, glancing sharply up and\par
down the street.\par
\par
"I am not sure," answered Rupert, knitting his brows.\par
"Of course, it's quite clear, the thing's all crooked.\par
But there are three of us, and--"\par
\par
"I shouldn't get the police," said Basil in a queer voice.\par
Rupert glanced at him and stared hard.\par
\par
"Basil," he cried, "you're trembling.  What's the matter--\par
are you afraid?"\par
\par
"Cold, perhaps," said the Major, eyeing him.  There was no doubt\par
that he was shaking.\par
\par
At last, after a few moments' scrutiny, Rupert broke into a curse.\par
\par
"You're laughing," he cried.  "I know that confounded, silent, shaky laugh\par
of yours.  What the deuce is the amusement, Basil?  Here we are,\par
all three of us, within a yard of a den of ruffians--"\par
\par
"But I shouldn't call the police," said Basil.  "We four heroes\par
are quite equal to a host," and he continued to quake with\par
his mysterious mirth.\par
\par
Rupert turned with impatience and strode swiftly down the court,\par
the rest of us following.  When he reached the door of No. 14\par
he turned abruptly, the revolver glittering in his hand.\par
\par
"Stand close," he said in the voice of a commander.\par
"The scoundrel may be attempting an escape at this moment.\par
We must fling open the door and rush in."\par
\par
The four of us cowered instantly under the archway, rigid, except for\par
the old judge and his convulsion of merriment.\par
\par
"Now," hissed Rupert Grant, turning his pale face and burning eyes\par
suddenly over his shoulder, "when I say `Four', follow me with a rush.\par
If I say `Hold him', pin the fellows down, whoever they are.\par
If I say `Stop', stop.  I shall say that if there are more than three.\par
If they attack us I shall empty my revolver on them.  Basil, have your\par
sword-stick ready.  Now--one, two three, four!"\par
\par
With the sound of the word the door burst open, and we fell into\par
the room like an invasion, only to stop dead.\par
\par
The room, which was an ordinary and neatly appointed office,\par
appeared, at the first glance, to be empty.  But on a second and more\par
careful glance, we saw seated behind a very large desk with pigeonholes\par
and drawers of bewildering multiplicity, a small man with a black\par
waxed moustache, and the air of a very average clerk, writing hard.\par
He looked up as we came to a standstill.\par
\par
"Did you knock?" he asked pleasantly.  "I am sorry if I did not hear.\par
What can I do for you?"\par
\par
There was a doubtful pause, and then, by general consent,\par
the Major himself, the victim of the outrage, stepped forward.\par
\par
The letter was in his hand, and he looked unusually grim.\par
\par
"Is your name P. G. Northover?" he asked.\par
\par
"That is my name," replied the other, smiling.\par
\par
"I think," said Major Brown, with an increase in the dark glow\par
of his face, "that this letter was written by you."  And with a loud\par
clap he struck open the letter on the desk with his clenched fist.\par
The man called Northover looked at it with unaffected interest\par
and merely nodded.\par
\par
"Well, sir," said the Major, breathing hard, "what about that?"\par
\par
"What about it, precisely," said the man with the moustache.\par
\par
"I am Major Brown," said that gentleman sternly.\par
\par
Northover bowed.  "Pleased to meet you, sir.  What have you\par
to say to me?"\par
\par
"Say!" cried the Major, loosing a sudden tempest; "why, I want this\par
confounded thing settled.  I want--"\par
\par
"Certainly, sir," said Northover, jumping up with a slight\par
elevation of the eyebrows.  "Will you take a chair for a moment."\par
And he pressed an electric bell just above him, which thrilled\par
and tinkled in a room beyond.  The Major put his hand on the back\par
of the chair offered him, but stood chafing and beating the floor\par
with his polished boot.\par
\par
The next moment an inner glass door was opened, and a fair, weedy,\par
young man, in a frock-coat, entered from within.\par
\par
"Mr Hopson," said Northover, "this is Major Brown.  Will you please\par
finish that thing for him I gave you this morning and bring it in?"\par
\par
"Yes, sir," said Mr Hopson, and vanished like lightning.\par
\par
"You will excuse me, gentlemen," said the egregious Northover,\par
with his radiant smile, "if I continue to work until Mr Hopson is ready.\par
I have some books that must be cleared up before I get away\par
on my holiday tomorrow.  And we all like a whiff of the country,\par
don't we?  Ha! ha!"\par
\par
The criminal took up his pen with a childlike laugh, and a silence ensued;\par
a placid and busy silence on the part of Mr P. G. Northover;\par
a raging silence on the part of everybody else.\par
\par
At length the scratching of Northover's pen in the stillness was mingled\par
with a knock at the door, almost simultaneous with the turning of\par
the handle, and Mr Hopson came in again with the same silent rapidity,\par
placed a paper before his principal, and disappeared again.\par
\par
The man at the desk pulled and twisted his spiky moustache for a few\par
moments as he ran his eye up and down the paper presented to him.\par
He took up his pen, with a slight, instantaneous frown,\par
and altered something, muttering--"Careless." Then he read it again\par
with the same impenetrable reflectiveness, and finally handed it\par
to the frantic Brown, whose hand was beating the devil's tattoo\par
on the back of the chair.\par
\par
"I think you will find that all right, Major," he said briefly.\par
\par
The Major looked at it; whether he found it all right or not will\par
appear later, but he found it like this:\par
\par
Major Brown to P. G. Northover.  L s.  d.\par
 January 1, to account rendered                                    5   6  0\par
 May 9, to potting and embedding of zoo pansies                    2   0  0\par
 To cost of trolley with flowers                                   0  15  0\par
 To hiring of man with trolley                                     0   5  0\par
 To hire of house and garden for one day                           1   0  0\par
 To furnishing of room in peacock curtains, copper ornaments, etc. 3   0  0\par
 To salary of Miss Jameson                                         1   0  0\par
 To salary of Mr Plover                                            1   0  0\par
                                                                 ----------\par
                                                           Total L14   6  0\par
A Remittance will oblige.\par
\par
"What," said Brown, after a dead pause, and with eyes that seemed\par
slowly rising out of his head, "What in heaven's name is this?"\par
\par
"What is it?" repeated Northover, cocking his eyebrow with amusement.\par
"It's your account, of course."\par
\par
"My account!"  The Major's ideas appeared to be in a vague stampede.\par
"My account!  And what have I got to do with it?"\par
\par
"Well," said Northover, laughing outright, "naturally I prefer you\par
to pay it."\par
\par
The Major's hand was still resting on the back of the chair as the\par
words came.  He scarcely stirred otherwise, but he lifted the chair\par
bodily into the air with one hand and hurled it at Northover's head.\par
\par
The legs crashed against the desk, so that Northover only got\par
a blow on the elbow as he sprang up with clenched fists,\par
only to be seized by the united rush of the rest of us.\par
The chair had fallen clattering on the empty floor.\par
\par
"Let me go, you scamps," he shouted.  "Let me--"\par
\par
"Stand still," cried Rupert authoritatively.  "Major Brown's action\par
is excusable.  The abominable crime you have attempted--"\par
\par
"A customer has a perfect right," said Northover hotly, "to question\par
an alleged overcharge, but, confound it all, not to throw furniture."\par
\par
"What, in God's name, do you mean by your customers and overcharges?"\par
shrieked Major Brown, whose keen feminine nature, steady in pain\par
or danger, became almost hysterical in the presence of a long\par
and exasperating mystery.  "Who are you?  I've never seen you\par
or your insolent tomfool bills.  I know one of your cursed brutes\par
tried to choke me--"\par
\par
"Mad," said Northover, gazing blankly round; "all of them mad.\par
I didn't know they travelled in quartettes."\par
\par
"Enough of this prevarication," said Rupert; "your crimes are discovered.\par
A policeman is stationed at the corner of the court.\par
Though only a private detective myself, I will take the responsibility\par
of telling you that anything you say--"\par
\par
"Mad," repeated Northover, with a weary air.\par
\par
And at this moment, for the first time, there struck in among them\par
the strange, sleepy voice of Basil Grant.\par
\par
"Major Brown," he said, "may I ask you a question?"\par
\par
The Major turned his head with an increased bewilderment.\par
\par
"You?" he cried; "certainly, Mr Grant."\par
\par
"Can you tell me," said the mystic, with sunken head and lowering brow,\par
as he traced a pattern in the dust with his sword-stick, "can you tell\par
me what was the name of the man who lived in your house before you?"\par
\par
The unhappy Major was only faintly more disturbed by this last\par
and futile irrelevancy, and he answered vaguely:\par
\par
"Yes, I think so; a man named Gurney something--a name with\par
a hyphen--Gurney-Brown; that was it."\par
\par
"And when did the house change hands?" said Basil, looking up sharply.\par
His strange eyes were burning brilliantly.\par
\par
"I came in last month," said the Major.\par
\par
And at the mere word the criminal Northover suddenly fell into his\par
great office chair and shouted with a volleying laughter.\par
\par
"Oh! it's too perfect--it's too exquisite," he gasped,\par
beating the arms with his fists.  He was laughing deafeningly;\par
Basil Grant was laughing voicelessly; and the rest of us only felt\par
that our heads were like weathercocks in a whirlwind.\par
\par
"Confound it, Basil," said Rupert, stamping.  "If you don't want\par
me to go mad and blow your metaphysical brains out, tell me what\par
all this means."\par
\par
Northover rose.\par
\par
"Permit me, sir, to explain," he said.  "And, first of all, permit me\par
to apologize to you, Major Brown, for a most abominable and unpardonable\par
blunder, which has caused you menace and inconvenience, in which,\par
if you will allow me to say so, you have behaved with astonishing\par
courage and dignity.  Of course you need not trouble about the bill.\par
We will stand the loss."  And, tearing the paper across, he flung\par
the halves into the waste-paper basket and bowed.\par
\par
Poor Brown's face was still a picture of distraction.\par
"But I don't even begin to understand," he cried.  "What bill?\par
what blunder? what loss?"\par
\par
Mr P. G. Northover advanced in the centre of the room,\par
thoughtfully, and with a great deal of unconscious dignity.\par
On closer consideration, there were apparent about him\par
other things beside a screwed moustache, especially a lean,\par
sallow face, hawk-like, and not without a careworn intelligence.\par
Then he looked up abruptly.\par
\par
"Do you know where you are, Major?" he said.\par
\par
"God knows I don't," said the warrior, with fervour.\par
\par
"You are standing," replied Northover, "in the office of the Adventure\par
and Romance Agency, Limited."\par
\par
"And what's that?" blankly inquired Brown.\par
\par
The man of business leaned over the back of the chair, and fixed\par
his dark eyes on the other's face.\par
\par
"Major," said he, "did you ever, as you walked along the empty\par
street upon some idle afternoon, feel the utter hunger\par
for something to happen--something, in the splendid words of\par
Walt Whitman:  `Something pernicious and dread; something far removed\par
from a puny and pious life; something unproved; something in a trance;\par
something loosed from its anchorage, and driving free.'\par
Did you ever feel that?"\par
\par
"Certainly not," said the Major shortly.\par
\par
"Then I must explain with more elaboration," said Mr Northover,\par
with a sigh.  "The Adventure and Romance Agency has been started\par
to meet a great modern desire.  On every side, in conversation\par
and in literature, we hear of the desire for a larger theatre\par
of events for something to waylay us and lead us splendidly astray.\par
Now the man who feels this desire for a varied life pays a yearly\par
or a quarterly sum to the Adventure and Romance Agency; in return,\par
the Adventure and Romance Agency undertakes to surround him with\par
startling and weird events.  As a man is leaving his front door,\par
an excited sweep approaches him and assures him of a plot against\par
his life; he gets into a cab, and is driven to an opium den;\par
he receives a mysterious telegram or a dramatic visit, and is immediately\par
in a vortex of incidents.  A very picturesque and moving story is\par
first written by one of the staff of distinguished novelists who are\par
at present hard at work in the adjoining room.  Yours, Major Brown\par
(designed by our Mr Grigsby), I consider peculiarly forcible\par
and pointed; it is almost a pity you did not see the end of it.\par
I need scarcely explain further the monstrous mistake.\par
Your predecessor in your present house, Mr Gurney-Brown, was a subscriber\par
to our agency, and our foolish clerks, ignoring alike the dignity\par
of the hyphen and the glory of military rank, positively imagined\par
that Major Brown and Mr Gurney-Brown were the same person.\par
Thus you were suddenly hurled into the middle of another man's story."\par
\par
"How on earth does the thing work?" asked Rupert Grant, with bright\par
and fascinated eyes.\par
\par
"We believe that we are doing a noble work," said Northover warmly.\par
"It has continually struck us that there is no element in modern\par
life that is more lamentable than the fact that the modern\par
man has to seek all artistic existence in a sedentary state.\par
If he wishes to float into fairyland, he reads a book;\par
if he wishes to dash into the thick of battle, he reads a book;\par
if he wishes to soar into heaven, he reads a book; if he wishes to slide\par
down the banisters, he reads a book.  We give him these visions,\par
but we give him exercise at the same time, the necessity of leaping\par
from wall to wall, of fighting strange gentlemen, of running down\par
long streets from pursuers--all healthy and pleasant exercises.\par
We give him a glimpse of that great morning world of Robin Hood or the\par
Knights Errant, when one great game was played under the splendid sky.\par
We give him back his childhood, that godlike time when we can act stories,\par
be our own heroes, and at the same instant dance and dream."\par
\par
Basil gazed at him curiously.  The most singular psychological\par
discovery had been reserved to the end, for as the little business\par
man ceased speaking he had the blazing eyes of a fanatic.\par
\par
Major Brown received the explanation with complete simplicity\par
and good humour.\par
\par
"Of course; awfully dense, sir," he said.  "No doubt at all,\par
the scheme excellent.  But I don't think--" He paused a moment,\par
and looked dreamily out of the window.  "I don't think you will find\par
me in it.  Somehow, when one's seen--seen the thing itself, you know--\par
blood and men screaming, one feels about having a little house and\par
a little hobby; in the Bible, you know, `There remaineth a rest'."\par
\par
Northover bowed.  Then after a pause he said:\par
\par
"Gentlemen, may I offer you my card.  If any of the rest of you desire,\par
at any time, to communicate with me, despite Major Brown's view\par
of the matter--"\par
\par
"I should be obliged for your card, sir," said the Major, in his\par
abrupt but courteous voice.  "Pay for chair."\par
\par
The agent of Romance and Adventure handed his card, laughing.\par
\par
It ran, "P. G. Northover, B.A., C.Q.T., Adventure and Romance Agency,\par
14 Tanner's Court, Fleet Street."\par
\par
"What on earth is "C.QT."?" asked Rupert Grant, looking over\par
the Major's shoulder.\par
\par
"Don't you know?" returned Northover.  "Haven't you ever heard\par
of the Club of Queer Trades?"\par
\par
"There seems to be a confounded lot of funny things we haven't heard of,"\par
said the little Major reflectively.  "What's this one?"\par
\par
"The Club of Queer Trades is a society consisting exclusively of\par
people who have invented some new and curious way of making money.\par
I was one of the earliest members."\par
\par
"You deserve to be," said Basil, taking up his great white hat,\par
with a smile, and speaking for the last time that evening.\par
\par
When they had passed out the Adventure and Romance agent wore\par
a queer smile, as he trod down the fire and locked up his desk.\par
"A fine chap, that Major; when one hasn't a touch of the poet one stands\par
some chance of being a poem.  But to think of such a clockwork little\par
creature of all people getting into the nets of one of Grigsby's tales,"\par
and he laughed out aloud in the silence.\par
\par
Just as the laugh echoed away, there came a sharp knock at the door.\par
An owlish head, with dark moustaches, was thrust in, with deprecating\par
and somewhat absurd inquiry.\par
\par
"What! back again, Major?" cried Northover in surprise.\par
"What can I do for you?"\par
\par
The Major shuffled feverishly into the room.\par
\par
"It's horribly absurd," he said.  "Something must have got started\par
in me that I never knew before.  But upon my soul I feel the most\par
desperate desire to know the end of it all."\par
\par
"The end of it all?"\par
\par
"Yes," said the Major.  "`Jackals', and the title-deeds, and `Death\par
to Major Brown'."\par
\par
The agent's face grew grave, but his eyes were amused.\par
\par
"I am terribly sorry, Major," said he, "but what you ask is impossible.\par
I don't know any one I would sooner oblige than you; but the rules of the\par
agency are strict.  The Adventures are confidential; you are an outsider;\par
I am not allowed to let you know an inch more than I can help.\par
I do hope you understand--"\par
\par
"There is no one," said Brown, "who understands discipline better\par
than I do.  Thank you very much.  Good night."\par
\par
And the little man withdrew for the last time.\par
\par
He married Miss Jameson, the lady with the red hair and the\par
green garments.  She was an actress, employed (with many others)\par
by the Romance Agency; and her marriage with the prim old veteran\par
caused some stir in her languid and intellectualized set.\par
She always replied very quietly that she had met scores of men\par
who acted splendidly in the charades provided for them by Northover,\par
but that she had only met one man who went down into a coal-cellar\par
when he really thought it contained a murderer.\par
\par
The Major and she are living as happily as birds, in an absurd villa,\par
and the former has taken to smoking.  Otherwise he is unchanged--\par
except, perhaps, there are moments when, alert and full of feminine\par
unselfishness as the Major is by nature, he falls into a trance\par
of abstraction.  Then his wife recognizes with a concealed smile,\par
by the blind look in his blue eyes, that he is wondering what were\par
the title-deeds, and why he was not allowed to mention jackals.\par
But, like so many old soldiers, Brown is religious, and believes\par
that he will realize the rest of those purple adventures in\par
a better world.\par
\par
\par
Chapter 2\par
\par
The Painful Fall of a Great Reputation\par
\par
\par
Basil Grant and I were talking one day in what is perhaps the most perfect\par
place for talking on earth--the top of a tolerably deserted tramcar.\par
To talk on the top of a hill is superb, but to talk on the top\par
of a flying hill is a fairy tale.\par
\par
The vast blank space of North London was flying by;\par
the very pace gave us a sense of its immensity and its meanness.\par
It was, as it were, a base infinitude, a squalid eternity,\par
and we felt the real horror of the poor parts of London, the horror\par
that is so totally missed and misrepresented by the sensational\par
novelists who depict it as being a matter of narrow streets,\par
filthy houses, criminals and maniacs, and dens of vice.\par
In a narrow street, in a den of vice, you do not expect civilization,\par
you do not expect order.  But the horror of this was the fact\par
that there was civilization, that there was order, but that\par
civilisation only showed its morbidity, and order only its monotony.\par
No one would say, in going through a criminal slum, "I see no statues.\par
I notice no cathedrals."  But here there were public buildings;\par
only they were mostly lunatic asylums.  Here there were statues;\par
only they were mostly statues of railway engineers and philanthropists--\par
two dingy classes of men united by their common contempt for the people.\par
Here there were churches; only they were the churches of dim\par
and erratic sects, Agapemonites or Irvingites.  Here, above all,\par
there were broad roads and vast crossings and tramway lines\par
and hospitals and all the real marks of civilization.\par
But though one never knew, in one sense, what one would see next,\par
there was one thing we knew we should not see--anything really great,\par
central, of the first class, anything that humanity had adored.\par
And with revulsion indescribable our emotions returned, I think,\par
to those really close and crooked entries, to those really mean streets,\par
to those genuine slums which lie round the Thames and the City,\par
in which nevertheless a real possibility remains that at any chance\par
corner the great cross of the great cathedral of Wren may strike\par
down the street like a thunderbolt.\par
\par
"But you must always remember also," said Grant to me, in his\par
heavy abstracted way, when I had urged this view, "that the very\par
vileness of the life of these ordered plebeian places bears\par
witness to the victory of the human soul.  I agree with you.\par
I agree that they have to live in something worse than barbarism.\par
They have to live in a fourth-rate civilization.  But yet I am\par
practically certain that the majority of people here are good people.\par
And being good is an adventure far more violent and daring than\par
sailing round the world.  Besides--"\par
\par
"Go on," I said.\par
\par
No answer came.\par
\par
"Go on," I said, looking up.\par
\par
The big blue eyes of Basil Grant were standing out of his head\par
and he was paying no attention to me.  He was staring over the side\par
of the tram.\par
\par
"What is the matter?"  I asked, peering over also.\par
\par
"It is very odd," said Grant at last, grimly, "that I should have\par
been caught out like this at the very moment of my optimism.\par
I said all these people were good, and there is the wickedest\par
man in England."\par
\par
"Where?"  I asked, leaning over further, "where?"\par
\par
"Oh, I was right enough," he went on, in that strange continuous\par
and sleepy tone which always angered his hearers at acute moments,\par
"I was right enough when I said all these people were good.\par
They are heroes; they are saints.  Now and then they may perhaps\par
steal a spoon or two; they may beat a wife or two with the poker.\par
But they are saints all the same; they are angels; they are robed\par
in white; they are clad with wings and haloes--at any rate compared\par
to that man."\par
\par
"Which man?"  I cried again, and then my eye caught the figure\par
at which Basil's bull's eyes were glaring.\par
\par
He was a slim, smooth person, passing very quickly among the quickly\par
passing crowd, but though there was nothing about him sufficient\par
to attract a startled notice, there was quite enough to demand\par
a curious consideration when once that notice was attracted.\par
He wore a black top-hat, but there was enough in it of those strange\par
curves whereby the decadent artist of the eighties tried to turn\par
the top-hat into something as rhythmic as an Etruscan vase.\par
His hair, which was largely grey, was curled with the instinct\par
of one who appreciated the gradual beauty of grey and silver.\par
The rest of his face was oval and, I thought, rather Oriental;\par
he had two black tufts of moustache.\par
\par
"What has he done?"  I asked.\par
\par
"I am not sure of the details," said Grant, "but his besetting\par
sin is a desire to intrigue to the disadvantage of others.\par
Probably he has adopted some imposture or other to effect his plan."\par
\par
"What plan?"  I asked.  "If you know all about him, why don't you\par
tell me why he is the wickedest man in England?  What is his name?"\par
\par
Basil Grant stared at me for some moments.\par
\par
"I think you've made a mistake in my meaning," he said.\par
"I don't know his name.  I never saw him before in my life."\par
\par
"Never saw him before!"  I cried, with a kind of anger; "then what\par
in heaven's name do you mean by saying that he is the wickedest\par
man in England?"\par
\par
"I meant what I said," said Basil Grant calmly.  "The moment\par
I saw that man, I saw all these people stricken with a sudden\par
and splendid innocence.  I saw that while all ordinary poor men\par
in the streets were being themselves, he was not being himself.\par
I saw that all the men in these slums, cadgers, pickpockets,\par
hooligans, are all, in the deepest sense, trying to be good.\par
And I saw that that man was trying to be evil."\par
\par
"But if you never saw him before--" I began.\par
\par
"In God's name, look at his face," cried out Basil in a voice\par
that startled the driver.  "Look at the eyebrows.  They mean\par
that infernal pride which made Satan so proud that he sneered\par
even at heaven when he was one of the first angels in it.\par
Look at his moustaches, they are so grown as to insult humanity.\par
In the name of the sacred heavens look at his hair.  In the name\par
of God and the stars, look at his hat."\par
\par
I stirred uncomfortably.\par
\par
"But, after all," I said, "this is very fanciful--perfectly absurd.\par
Look at the mere facts.  You have never seen the man before, you--"\par
\par
"Oh, the mere facts," he cried out in a kind of despair.\par
"The mere facts!  Do you really admit--are you still so sunk\par
in superstitions, so clinging to dim and prehistoric altars,\par
that you believe in facts?  Do you not trust an immediate impression?"\par
\par
"Well, an immediate impression may be," I said, "a little less\par
practical than facts."\par
\par
"Bosh," he said.  "On what else is the whole world run\par
but immediate impressions?  What is more practical?\par
My friend, the philosophy of this world may be founded on facts,\par
its business is run on spiritual impressions and atmospheres.\par
Why do you refuse or accept a clerk?  Do you measure his skull?\par
Do you read up his physiological state in a handbook?\par
Do you go upon facts at all?  Not a scrap.  You accept a clerk who\par
may save your business--you refuse a clerk that may rob your till,\par
entirely upon those immediate mystical impressions under the pressure\par
of which I pronounce, with a perfect sense of certainty and sincerity,\par
that that man walking in that street beside us is a humbug and a\par
villain of some kind."\par
\par
"You always put things well," I said, "but, of course, such things\par
cannot immediately be put to the test."\par
\par
Basil sprang up straight and swayed with the swaying car.\par
\par
"Let us get off and follow him," he said.  "I bet you five pounds\par
it will turn out as I say."\par
\par
And with a scuttle, a jump, and a run, we were off the car.\par
\par
The man with the curved silver hair and the curved Eastern face walked\par
along for some time, his long splendid frock-coat flying behind him.\par
Then he swung sharply out of the great glaring road and disappeared\par
down an ill-lit alley.  We swung silently after him.\par
\par
"This is an odd turning for a man of that kind to take," I said.\par
\par
"A man of what kind?" asked my friend.\par
\par
"Well," I said, "a man with that kind of expression and those boots.\par
I thought it rather odd, to tell the truth, that he should be in this\par
part of the world at all."\par
\par
"Ah, yes," said Basil, and said no more.\par
\par
We tramped on, looking steadily in front of us.  The elegant figure,\par
like the figure of a black swan, was silhouetted suddenly against\par
the glare of intermittent gaslight and then swallowed again in night.\par
The intervals between the lights were long, and a fog was thickening\par
the whole city.  Our pace, therefore, had become swift and mechanical\par
between the lamp-posts; but Basil came to a standstill suddenly\par
like a reined horse; I stopped also.  We had almost run into the man.\par
A great part of the solid darkness in front of us was the darkness\par
of his body.\par
\par
At first I thought he had turned to face us.  But though we\par
were hardly a yard off he did not realize that we were there.\par
He tapped four times on a very low and dirty door in the dark,\par
crabbed street.  A gleam of gas cut the darkness as it opened slowly.\par
We listened intently, but the interview was short and simple\par
and inexplicable as an interview could be.  Our exquisite friend\par
handed in what looked like a paper or a card and said:\par
\par
"At once.  Take a cab."\par
\par
A heavy, deep voice from inside said:\par
\par
"Right you are."\par
\par
And with a click we were in the blackness again, and striding\par
after the striding stranger through a labyrinth of London lanes,\par
the lights just helping us.  It was only five o'clock, but winter\par
and the fog had made it like midnight.\par
\par
"This is really an extraordinary walk for the patent-leather boots,"\par
I repeated.\par
\par
"I don't know," said Basil humbly.  "It leads to Berkeley Square."\par
\par
As I tramped on I strained my eyes through the dusky atmosphere and tried\par
to make out the direction described.  For some ten minutes I wondered\par
and doubted; at the end of that I saw that my friend was right.\par
We were coming to the great dreary spaces of fashionable London--\par
more dreary, one must admit, even than the dreary plebeian spaces.\par
\par
"This is very extraordinary!" said Basil Grant, as we turned\par
into Berkeley Square.\par
\par
"What is extraordinary?"  I asked.  "I thought you said it\par
was quite natural."\par
\par
"I do not wonder," answered Basil, "at his walking through\par
nasty streets; I do not wonder at his going to Berkeley Square.\par
But I do wonder at his going to the house of a very good man."\par
\par
"What very good man?"  I asked with exasperation.\par
\par
"The operation of time is a singular one," he said with his\par
imperturbable irrelevancy.  "It is not a true statement of the case to say\par
that I have forgotten my career when I was a judge and a public man.\par
I remember it all vividly, but it is like remembering some novel.\par
But fifteen years ago I knew this square as well as Lord Rosebery does,\par
and a confounded long sight better than that man who is going up\par
the steps of old Beaumont's house."\par
\par
"Who is old Beaumont?"  I asked irritably.\par
\par
"A perfectly good fellow.  Lord Beaumont of Foxwood--don't you\par
know his name?  He is a man of transparent sincerity, a nobleman\par
who does more work than a navvy, a socialist, an anarchist,\par
I don't know what; anyhow, he's a philosopher and philanthropist.\par
I admit he has the slight disadvantage of being, beyond all question,\par
off his head.  He has that real disadvantage which has arisen out\par
of the modern worship of progress and novelty; and he thinks anything\par
odd and new must be an advance.  If you went to him and proposed to eat\par
your grandmother, he would agree with you, so long as you put it\par
on hygienic and public grounds, as a cheap alternative to cremation.\par
So long as you progress fast enough it seems a matter of indifference\par
to him whether you are progressing to the stars or the devil.\par
So his house is filled with an endless succession of literary\par
and political fashions; men who wear long hair because it\par
is romantic; men who wear short hair because it is medical;\par
men who walk on their feet only to exercise their hands;\par
and men who walk on their hands for fear of tiring their feet.\par
But though the inhabitants of his salons are generally fools,\par
like himself, they are almost always, like himself, good men.\par
I am really surprised to see a criminal enter there."\par
\par
"My good fellow," I said firmly, striking my foot on the pavement,\par
"the truth of this affair is very simple.  To use your own eloquent\par
language, you have the `slight disadvantage' of being off your head.\par
You see a total stranger in a public street; you choose to start\par
certain theories about his eyebrows.  You then treat him as a burglar\par
because he enters an honest man's door.  The thing is too monstrous.\par
Admit that it is, Basil, and come home with me.  Though these\par
people are still having tea, yet with the distance we have to go,\par
we shall be late for dinner."\par
\par
Basil's eyes were shining in the twilight like lamps.\par
\par
"I thought," he said, "that I had outlived vanity."\par
\par
"What do you want now?"  I cried.\par
\par
"I want," he cried out, "what a girl wants when she wears her new frock;\par
I want what a boy wants when he goes in for a clanging match\par
with a monitor--I want to show somebody what a fine fellow I am.\par
I am as right about that man as I am about your having a hat\par
on your head.  You say it cannot be tested.  I say it can.\par
I will take you to see my old friend Beaumont.  He is a delightful\par
man to know."\par
\par
"Do you really mean--?"  I began.\par
\par
"I will apologize," he said calmly, "for our not being dressed\par
for a call," and walking across the vast misty square, he walked\par
up the dark stone steps and rang at the bell.\par
\par
A severe servant in black and white opened the door to us:\par
on receiving my friend's name his manner passed in a flash from\par
astonishment to respect.  We were ushered into the house very quickly,\par
but not so quickly but that our host, a white-haired man with a\par
fiery face, came out quickly to meet us.\par
\par
"My dear fellow," he cried, shaking Basil's hand again and again,\par
"I have not seen you for years.  Have you been--er--" he said,\par
rather wildly, "have you been in the country?"\par
\par
"Not for all that time," answered Basil, smiling.  "I have long\par
given up my official position, my dear Philip, and have been\par
living in a deliberate retirement.  I hope I do not come at\par
an inopportune moment."\par
\par
"An inopportune moment," cried the ardent gentleman.\par
"You come at the most opportune moment I could imagine.\par
Do you know who is here?"\par
\par
"I do not," answered Grant, with gravity.  Even as he spoke a roar\par
of laughter came from the inner room.\par
\par
"Basil," said Lord Beaumont solemnly, "I have Wimpole here."\par
\par
"And who is Wimpole?"\par
\par
"Basil," cried the other, "you must have been in the country.\par
You must have been in the antipodes.  You must have been in the moon.\par
Who is Wimpole?  Who was Shakespeare?"\par
\par
"As to who Shakespeare was," answered my friend placidly,\par
"my views go no further than thinking that he was not Bacon.\par
More probably he was Mary Queen of Scots.  But as to who Wimpole is--"\par
and his speech also was cloven with a roar of laughter from within.\par
\par
"Wimpole!" cried Lord Beaumont, in a sort of ecstasy.\par
"Haven't you heard of the great modern wit?  My dear fellow,\par
he has turned conversation, I do not say into an art--\par
for that, perhaps, it always was but into a great art,\par
like the statuary of Michael Angelo--an art of masterpieces.\par
His repartees, my good friend, startle one like a man shot dead.\par
They are final; they are--"\par
\par
Again there came the hilarious roar from the room, and almost\par
with the very noise of it, a big, panting apoplectic old gentleman\par
came out of the inner house into the hall where we were standing.\par
\par
"Now, my dear chap," began Lord Beaumont hastily.\par
\par
"I tell you, Beaumont, I won't stand it," exploded the large\par
old gentleman.  "I won't be made game of by a twopenny literary\par
adventurer like that.  I won't be made a guy.  I won't--"\par
\par
"Come, come," said Beaumont feverishly.  "Let me introduce you.\par
This is Mr Justice Grant--that is, Mr Grant.  Basil, I am sure you\par
have heard of Sir Walter Cholmondeliegh."\par
\par
"Who has not?" asked Grant, and bowed to the worthy old baronet,\par
eyeing him with some curiosity.  He was hot and heavy in his\par
momentary anger, but even that could not conceal the noble though\par
opulent outline of his face and body, the florid white hair,\par
the Roman nose, the body stalwart though corpulent, the chin\par
aristocratic though double.  He was a magnificent courtly gentleman;\par
so much of a gentleman that he could show an unquestionable weakness\par
of anger without altogether losing dignity; so much of a gentleman\par
that even his faux pas were well-bred.\par
\par
"I am distressed beyond expression, Beaumont," he said gruffly,\par
"to fail in respect to these gentlemen, and even more especially\par
to fail in it in your house.  But it is not you or they that are\par
in any way concerned, but that flashy half-caste jackanapes--"\par
\par
At this moment a young man with a twist of red moustache and a sombre\par
air came out of the inner room.  He also did not seem to be greatly\par
enjoying the intellectual banquet within.\par
\par
"I think you remember my friend and secretary, Mr Drummond,"\par
said Lord Beaumont, turning to Grant, "even if you only remember\par
him as a schoolboy."\par
\par
"Perfectly," said the other.  Mr Drummond shook hands pleasantly\par
and respectfully, but the cloud was still on his brow.\par
Turning to Sir Walter Cholmondeliegh, he said:\par
\par
"I was sent by Lady Beaumont to express her hope that you\par
were not going yet, Sir Walter.  She says she has scarcely seen\par
anything of you."\par
\par
The old gentleman, still red in the face, had a temporary\par
internal struggle; then his good manners triumphed, and with a gesture\par
of obeisance and a vague utterance of, "If Lady Beaumont ... a lady,\par
of course," he followed the young man back into the salon.\par
He had scarcely been deposited there half a minute before\par
another peal of laughter told that he had (in all probability)\par
been scored off again.\par
\par
"Of course, I can excuse dear old Cholmondeliegh," said Beaumont,\par
as he helped us off with our coats.  "He has not the modern mind."\par
\par
"What is the modern mind?" asked Grant.\par
\par
"Oh, it's enlightened, you know, and progressive--and faces the facts\par
of life seriously."  At this moment another roar of laughter\par
came from within.\par
\par
"I only ask," said Basil, "because of the last two friends of yours\par
who had the modern mind; one thought it wrong to eat fishes\par
and the other thought it right to eat men.  I beg your pardon--\par
this way, if I remember right."\par
\par
"Do you know," said Lord Beaumont, with a sort of feverish entertainment,\par
as he trotted after us towards the interior, "I can never quite\par
make out which side you are on.  Sometimes you seem so liberal\par
and sometimes so reactionary.  Are you a modern, Basil?"\par
\par
"No," said Basil, loudly and cheerfully, as he entered\par
the crowded drawing-room.\par
\par
This caused a slight diversion, and some eyes were turned away\par
from our slim friend with the Oriental face for the first time\par
that afternoon.  Two people, however, still looked at him.\par
One was the daughter of the house, Muriel Beaumont, who gazed at\par
him with great violet eyes and with the intense and awful thirst\par
of the female upper class for verbal amusement and stimulus.\par
The other was Sir Walter Cholmondeliegh, who looked at him with a still\par
and sullen but unmistakable desire to throw him out of the window.\par
\par
He sat there, coiled rather than seated on the easy chair;\par
everything from the curves of his smooth limbs to the coils\par
of his silvered hair suggesting the circles of a serpent more than\par
the straight limbs of a man--the unmistakable, splendid serpentine\par
gentleman we had seen walking in North London, his eyes shining\par
with repeated victory.\par
\par
"What I can't understand, Mr Wimpole," said Muriel Beaumont\par
eagerly, "is how you contrive to treat all this so easily.\par
You say things quite philosophical and yet so wildly funny.\par
If I thought of such things, I'm sure I should laugh outright\par
when the thought first came."\par
\par
"I agree with Miss Beaumont," said Sir Walter, suddenly exploding\par
with indignation.  "If I had thought of anything so futile,\par
I should find it difficult to keep my countenance."\par
\par
"Difficult to keep your countenance," cried Mr Wimpole,\par
with an air of alarm; "oh, do keep your countenance!\par
Keep it in the British Museum."\par
\par
Every one laughed uproariously, as they always do at an already\par
admitted readiness, and Sir Walter, turning suddenly purple, shouted out:\par
\par
"Do you know who you are talking to, with your confounded tomfooleries?"\par
\par
"I never talk tomfooleries," said the other, "without first\par
knowing my audience."\par
\par
Grant walked across the room and tapped the red-moustached secretary\par
on the shoulder.  That gentleman was leaning against the wall\par
regarding the whole scene with a great deal of gloom; but, I fancied,\par
with very particular gloom when his eyes fell on the young lady\par
of the house rapturously listening to Wimpole.\par
\par
"May I have a word with you outside, Drummond?" asked Grant.\par
"It is about business.  Lady Beaumont will excuse us."\par
\par
I followed my friend, at his own request, greatly wondering,\par
to this strange external interview.  We passed abruptly into a kind\par
of side room out of the hall.\par
\par
"Drummond," said Basil sharply, "there are a great many\par
good people, and a great many sane people here this afternoon.\par
Unfortunately, by a kind of coincidence, all the good people are mad,\par
and all the sane people are wicked.  You are the only person\par
I know of here who is honest and has also some common sense.\par
What do you make of Wimpole?"\par
\par
Mr Secretary Drummond had a pale face and red hair; but at this\par
his face became suddenly as red as his moustache.\par
\par
"I am not a fair judge of him," he said.\par
\par
"Why not?" asked Grant.\par
\par
"Because I hate him like hell," said the other, after a long\par
pause and violently.\par
\par
Neither Grant nor I needed to ask the reason; his glances towards\par
Miss Beaumont and the stranger were sufficiently illuminating.\par
Grant said quietly:\par
\par
"But before--before you came to hate him, what did you really\par
think of him?"\par
\par
"I am in a terrible difficulty," said the young man, and his\par
voice told us, like a clear bell, that he was an honest man.\par
"If I spoke about him as I feel about him now, I could not trust myself.\par
And I should like to be able to say that when I first saw him\par
I thought he was charming.  But again, the fact is I didn't. I\par
hate him, that is my private affair.  But I also disapprove of him--\par
really I do believe I disapprove of him quite apart from my\par
private feelings.  When first he came, I admit he was much quieter,\par
but I did not like, so to speak, the moral swell of him.\par
Then that jolly old Sir Walter Cholmondeliegh got introduced to us,\par
and this fellow, with his cheap-jack wit, began to score off the old\par
man in the way he does now.  Then I felt that he must be a bad lot;\par
it must be bad to fight the old and the kindly.  And he fights the poor\par
old chap savagely, unceasingly, as if he hated old age and kindliness.\par
Take, if you want it, the evidence of a prejudiced witness.\par
I admit that I hate the man because a certain person admires him.\par
But I believe that apart from that I should hate the man because old\par
Sir Walter hates him."\par
\par
This speech affected me with a genuine sense of esteem and pity for\par
the young man; that is, of pity for him because of his obviously hopeless\par
worship of Miss Beaumont, and of esteem for him because of the direct\par
realistic account of the history of Wimpole which he had given.\par
Still, I was sorry that he seemed so steadily set against the man,\par
and could not help referring it to an instinct of his personal relations,\par
however nobly disguised from himself.\par
\par
In the middle of these meditations, Grant whispered in my ear\par
what was perhaps the most startling of all interruptions.\par
\par
"In the name of God, let's get away."\par
\par
I have never known exactly in how odd a way this odd old man affected me.\par
I only know that for some reason or other he so affected me that I was,\par
within a few minutes, in the street outside.\par
\par
"This," he said, "is a beastly but amusing affair."\par
\par
"What is?"  I asked, baldly enough.\par
\par
"This affair.  Listen to me, my old friend.  Lord and Lady Beaumont\par
have just invited you and me to a grand dinner-party this very night,\par
at which Mr Wimpole will be in all his glory.  Well, there is nothing\par
very extraordinary about that.  The extraordinary thing is that we\par
are not going."\par
\par
"Well, really," I said, "it is already six o'clock and I doubt if we\par
could get home and dress.  I see nothing extraordinary in the fact\par
that we are not going."\par
\par
"Don't you?" said Grant.  "I'll bet you'll see something extraordinary\par
in what we're doing instead."\par
\par
I looked at him blankly.\par
\par
"Doing instead?"  I asked.  "What are we doing instead?"\par
\par
"Why," said he, "we are waiting for one or two hours outside this\par
house on a winter evening.  You must forgive me; it is all my vanity.\par
It is only to show you that I am right.  Can you, with the assistance\par
of this cigar, wait until both Sir Walter Cholmondeliegh and the mystic\par
Wimpole have left this house?"\par
\par
"Certainly," I said.  "But I do not know which is likely to leave first.\par
Have you any notion?"\par
\par
"No," he said.  "Sir Walter may leave first in a glow of rage.\par
Or again, Mr Wimpole may leave first, feeling that his last\par
epigram is a thing to be flung behind him like a firework.\par
And Sir Walter may remain some time to analyse Mr Wimpole's character.\par
But they will both have to leave within reasonable time, for they\par
will both have to get dressed and come back to dinner here tonight."\par
\par
As he spoke the shrill double whistle from the porch\par
of the great house drew a dark cab to the dark portal.\par
And then a thing happened that we really had not expected.\par
Mr Wimpole and Sir Walter Cholmondeliegh came out at the same moment.\par
\par
They paused for a second or two opposite each other in a natural doubt;\par
then a certain geniality, fundamental perhaps in both of them,\par
made Sir Walter smile and say:  "The night is foggy.\par
Pray take my cab."\par
\par
Before I could count twenty the cab had gone rattling up the street\par
with both of them.  And before I could count twenty-three Grant\par
had hissed in my ear:\par
\par
"Run after the cab; run as if you were running from a mad dog--run."\par
\par
We pelted on steadily, keeping the cab in sight, through dark\par
mazy streets.  God only, I thought, knows why we are running at all,\par
but we are running hard.  Fortunately we did not run far.\par
The cab pulled up at the fork of two streets and Sir Walter paid\par
the cabman, who drove away rejoicing, having just come in contact\par
with the more generous among the rich.  Then the two men talked\par
together as men do talk together after giving and receiving\par
great insults, the talk which leads either to forgiveness or a duel--\par
at least so it seemed as we watched it from ten yards off.\par
Then the two men shook hands heartily, and one went down one fork\par
of the road and one down another.\par
\par
Basil, with one of his rare gestures, flung his arms forward.\par
\par
"Run after that scoundrel," he cried; "let us catch him now."\par
\par
We dashed across the open space and reached the juncture of two paths.\par
\par
"Stop!"  I shouted wildly to Grant.  "That's the wrong turning."\par
\par
He ran on.\par
\par
"Idiot!"  I howled.  "Sir Walter's gone down there.\par
Wimpole has slipped us.  He's half a mile down the other road.\par
You're wrong ... Are you deaf?  You're wrong!"\par
\par
"I don't think I am," he panted, and ran on.\par
\par
"But I saw him!"  I cried.  "Look in front of you.\par
Is that Wimpole?  It's the old man ... What are you doing?\par
What are we to do?"\par
\par
"Keep running," said Grant.\par
\par
Running soon brought us up to the broad back of the pompous old baronet,\par
whose white whiskers shone silver in the fitful lamplight.\par
My brain was utterly bewildered.  I grasped nothing.\par
\par
"Charlie," said Basil hoarsely, "can you believe in my common sense\par
for four minutes?"\par
\par
"Of course," I said, panting.\par
\par
"Then help me to catch that man in front and hold him down.\par
Do it at once when I say `Now'. Now!"\par
\par
We sprang on Sir Walter Cholmondeliegh, and rolled that portly\par
old gentleman on his back.  He fought with a commendable valour,\par
but we got him tight.  I had not the remotest notion why.\par
He had a splendid and full-blooded vigour; when he could\par
not box he kicked, and we bound him; when he could not kick\par
he shouted, and we gagged him.  Then, by Basil's arrangement,\par
we dragged him into a small court by the street side and waited.\par
As I say, I had no notion why.\par
\par
"I am sorry to incommode you," said Basil calmly out of the darkness;\par
"but I have made an appointment here."\par
\par
"An appointment!"  I said blankly.\par
\par
"Yes," he said, glancing calmly at the apoplectic old aristocrat gagged\par
on the ground, whose eyes were starting impotently from his head.\par
"I have made an appointment here with a thoroughly nice young fellow.\par
An old friend.  Jasper Drummond his name is--you may have met him\par
this afternoon at the Beaumonts.  He can scarcely come though till\par
the Beaumonts' dinner is over."\par
\par
For I do not know how many hours we stood there calmly in the darkness.\par
By the time those hours were over I had thoroughly made up my mind\par
that the same thing had happened which had happened long ago on\par
the bench of a British Court of Justice.  Basil Grant had gone mad.\par
I could imagine no other explanation of the facts, with the portly,\par
purple-faced old country gentleman flung there strangled on the floor\par
like a bundle of wood.\par
\par
After about four hours a lean figure in evening dress rushed into\par
the court.  A glimpse of gaslight showed the red moustache and white\par
face of Jasper Drummond.\par
\par
"Mr Grant," he said blankly, "the thing is incredible.\par
You were right; but what did you mean?  All through this dinner-party,\par
where dukes and duchesses and editors of Quarterlies had come especially\par
to hear him, that extraordinary Wimpole kept perfectly silent.\par
He didn't say a funny thing.  He didn't say anything at all.\par
What does it mean?"\par
\par
Grant pointed to the portly old gentleman on the ground.\par
\par
"That is what it means," he said.\par
\par
Drummond, on observing a fat gentleman lying so calmly about the place,\par
jumped back, as from a mouse.\par
\par
"What?" he said weakly, "... what?"\par
\par
Basil bent suddenly down and tore a paper out of Sir Walter's\par
breastpocket, a paper which the baronet, even in his hampered state,\par
seemed to make some effort to retain.\par
\par
It was a large loose piece of white wrapping paper, which\par
Mr Jasper Drummond read with a vacant eye and undisguised astonishment.\par
As far as he could make out, it consisted of a series of questions\par
and answers, or at least of remarks and replies, arranged in the manner\par
of a catechism.  The greater part of the document had been torn\par
and obliterated in the struggle, but the termination remained.\par
It ran as follows:\par
\par
C. Says ... Keep countenance.\par
\par
W. Keep ... British Museum.\par
\par
C. Know whom talk ... absurdities.\par
\par
W. Never talk absurdities without\par
\par
"What is it?" cried Drummond, flinging the paper down in a sort\par
of final fury.\par
\par
"What is it?" replied Grant, his voice rising into a kind\par
of splendid chant.  "What is it?  It is a great new profession.\par
A great new trade.  A trifle immoral, I admit, but still great,\par
like piracy."\par
\par
"A new profession!" said the young man with the red moustache vaguely;\par
"a new trade!"\par
\par
"A new trade," repeated Grant, with a strange exultation,\par
"a new profession!  What a pity it is immoral."\par
\par
"But what the deuce is it?" cried Drummond and I in a breath of blasphemy.\par
\par
"It is," said Grant calmly, "the great new trade of the Organizer\par
of Repartee.  This fat old gentleman lying on the ground strikes you,\par
as I have no doubt, as very stupid and very rich.  Let me clear\par
his character.  He is, like ourselves, very clever and very poor.\par
He is also not really at all fat; all that is stuffing.\par
He is not particularly old, and his name is not Cholmondeliegh.\par
He is a swindler, and a swindler of a perfectly delightful and\par
novel kind.  He hires himself out at dinner-parties to lead up\par
to other people's repartees.  According to a preconcerted scheme\par
(which you may find on that piece of paper), he says the stupid\par
things he has arranged for himself, and his client says the clever\par
things arranged for him.  In short, he allows himself to be scored\par
off for a guinea a night."\par
\par
"And this fellow Wimpole--" began Drummond with indignation.\par
\par
"This fellow Wimpole," said Basil Grant, smiling, "will not be\par
an intellectual rival in the future.  He had some fine things,\par
elegance and silvered hair, and so on.  But the intellect is with\par
our friend on the floor."\par
\par
"That fellow," cried Drummond furiously, "that fellow ought\par
to be in gaol."\par
\par
"Not at all," said Basil indulgently; "he ought to be in the Club\par
of Queer Trades."\par
\par
\par
Chapter 3\par
\par
The Awful Reason of the Vicar's Visit\par
\par
\par
The revolt of Matter against Man (which I believe to exist)\par
has now been reduced to a singular condition.  It is the small\par
things rather than the large things which make war against us and,\par
I may add, beat us.  The bones of the last mammoth have long\par
ago decayed, a mighty wreck; the tempests no longer devour our navies,\par
nor the mountains with hearts of fire heap hell over our cities.\par
But we are engaged in a bitter and eternal war with small things;\par
chiefly with microbes and with collar studs.  The stud with which I\par
was engaged (on fierce and equal terms) as I made the above reflections,\par
was one which I was trying to introduce into my shirt collar\par
when a loud knock came at the door.\par
\par
My first thought was as to whether Basil Grant had called to fetch me.\par
He and I were to turn up at the same dinner-party (for which I was\par
in the act of dressing), and it might be that he had taken it into\par
his head to come my way, though we had arranged to go separately.\par
It was a small and confidential affair at the table of a good\par
but unconventional political lady, an old friend of his.\par
She had asked us both to meet a third guest, a Captain Fraser,\par
who had made something of a name and was an authority on chimpanzees.\par
As Basil was an old friend of the hostess and I had never seen her,\par
I felt that it was quite possible that he (with his usual social sagacity)\par
might have decided to take me along in order to break the ice.\par
The theory, like all my theories, was complete; but as a fact it\par
was not Basil.\par
\par
I was handed a visiting card inscribed:  "Rev. Ellis Shorter",\par
and underneath was written in pencil, but in a hand in which even hurry\par
could not conceal a depressing and gentlemanly excellence, "Asking the\par
favour of a few moments' conversation on a most urgent matter."!\par
\par
I had already subdued the stud, thereby proclaiming that the image\par
of God has supremacy over all matters (a valuable truth), and throwing\par
on my dress-coat and waistcoat, hurried into the drawing-room. He rose\par
at my entrance, flapping like a seal; I can use no other description.\par
He flapped a plaid shawl over his right arm; he flapped a pair\par
of pathetic black gloves; he flapped his clothes; I may say,\par
without exaggeration, that he flapped his eyelids, as he rose.\par
He was a bald-browed, white-haired, white-whiskered old clergyman,\par
of a flappy and floppy type.  He said:\par
\par
"I am so sorry.  I am so very sorry.  I am so extremely sorry.\par
I come--I can only say--I can only say in my defence, that I come--\par
upon an important matter.  Pray forgive me."\par
\par
I told him I forgave perfectly and waited.\par
\par
"What I have to say," he said brokenly, "is so dreadful--\par
it is so dreadful--I have lived a quiet life."\par
\par
I was burning to get away, for it was already doubtful if I should\par
be in time for dinner.  But there was something about the old man's\par
honest air of bitterness that seemed to open to me the possibilities\par
of life larger and more tragic than my own.\par
\par
I said gently:  "Pray go on."\par
\par
Nevertheless the old gentleman, being a gentleman as well as old,\par
noticed my secret impatience and seemed still more unmanned.\par
\par
"I'm so sorry," he said meekly; "I wouldn't have come--but for--\par
your friend Major Brown recommended me to come here."\par
\par
"Major Brown!"  I said, with some interest.\par
\par
"Yes," said the Reverend Mr Shorter, feverishly flapping his plaid\par
shawl about.  "He told me you helped him in a great difficulty--\par
and my difficulty!  Oh, my dear sir, it's a matter of life and death."\par
\par
I rose abruptly, in an acute perplexity.  "Will it take long,\par
Mr Shorter?"  I asked.  "I have to go out to dinner almost at once."\par
\par
He rose also, trembling from head to foot, and yet somehow,\par
with all his moral palsy, he rose to the dignity of his age\par
and his office.\par
\par
"I have no right, Mr Swinburne--I have no right at all," he said.\par
"If you have to go out to dinner, you have of course--\par
a perfect right--of course a perfect right.  But when you come back--\par
a man will be dead."\par
\par
And he sat down, quaking like a jelly.\par
\par
The triviality of the dinner had been in those two minutes dwarfed\par
and drowned in my mind.  I did not want to go and see a political widow,\par
and a captain who collected apes; I wanted to hear what had brought\par
this dear, doddering old vicar into relation with immediate perils.\par
\par
"Will you have a cigar?"  I said.\par
\par
"No, thank you," he said, with indescribable embarrassment,\par
as if not smoking cigars was a social disgrace.\par
\par
"A glass of wine?"  I said.\par
\par
"No, thank you, no, thank you; not just now," he repeated with that\par
hysterical eagerness with which people who do not drink at all often\par
try to convey that on any other night of the week they would sit\par
up all night drinking rum-punch. "Not just now, thank you."\par
\par
"Nothing else I can get for you?"  I said, feeling genuinely sorry\par
for the well-mannered old donkey.  "A cup of tea?"\par
\par
I saw a struggle in his eye and I conquered.  When the cup\par
of tea came he drank it like a dipsomaniac gulping brandy.\par
Then he fell back and said:\par
\par
"I have had such a time, Mr Swinburne.  I am not used to\par
these excitements.  As Vicar of Chuntsey, in Essex'--he threw this\par
in with an indescribable airiness of vanity--'I have never known\par
such things happen."\par
\par
"What things happen?"  I asked.\par
\par
He straightened himself with sudden dignity.\par
\par
"As Vicar of Chuntsey, in Essex," he said, "I have never been forcibly\par
dressed up as an old woman and made to take part in a crime in the\par
character of an old woman.  Never once.  My experience may be small.\par
It may be insufficient.  But it has never occurred to me before."\par
\par
"I have never heard of it," I said, "as among the duties of a clergyman.\par
But I am not well up in church matters.  Excuse me if perhaps I\par
failed to follow you correctly.  Dressed up--as what?"\par
\par
"As an old woman," said the vicar solemnly, "as an old woman."\par
\par
I thought in my heart that it required no great transformation\par
to make an old woman of him, but the thing was evidently more tragic\par
than comic, and I said respectfully:\par
\par
"May I ask how it occurred?"\par
\par
"I will begin at the beginning," said Mr Shorter, "and I\par
will tell my story with the utmost possible precision.\par
At seventeen minutes past eleven this morning I left the vicarage\par
to keep certain appointments and pay certain visits in the village.\par
My first visit was to Mr Jervis, the treasurer of our League\par
of Christian Amusements, with whom I concluded some business\par
touching the claim made by Parkes the gardener in the matter\par
of the rolling of our tennis lawn.  I then visited Mrs Arnett,\par
a very earnest churchwoman, but permanently bedridden.\par
She is the author of several small works of devotion, and of a book\par
of verse, entitled (unless my memory misleads me) Eglantine."\par
\par
He uttered all this not only with deliberation, but with something\par
that can only be called, by a contradictory phrase, eager deliberation.\par
He had, I think, a vague memory in his head of the detectives\par
in the detective stories, who always sternly require that nothing\par
should be kept back.\par
\par
"I then proceeded," he went on, with the same maddening conscientiousness\par
of manner, "to Mr Carr (not Mr James Carr, of course; Mr Robert Carr)\par
who is temporarily assisting our organist, and having consulted with him\par
(on the subject of a choir boy who is accused, I cannot as yet\par
say whether justly or not, of cutting holes in the organ pipes),\par
I finally dropped in upon a Dorcas meeting at the house of Miss Brett.\par
The Dorcas meetings are usually held at the vicarage, but my wife\par
being unwell, Miss Brett, a newcomer in our village, but very\par
active in church work, had very kindly consented to hold them.\par
The Dorcas society is entirely under my wife's management as a rule,\par
and except for Miss Brett, who, as I say, is very active, I scarcely\par
know any members of it.  I had, however, promised to drop in on them,\par
and I did so.\par
\par
"When I arrived there were only four other maiden ladies with Miss Brett,\par
but they were sewing very busily.  It is very difficult, of course,\par
for any person, however strongly impressed with the necessity\par
in these matters of full and exact exposition of the facts,\par
to remember and repeat the actual details of a conversation,\par
particularly a conversation which (though inspired with a most worthy\par
and admirable zeal for good work) was one which did not greatly impress\par
the hearer's mind at the time and was in fact--er--mostly about socks.\par
I can, however, remember distinctly that one of the spinster ladies\par
(she was a thin person with a woollen shawl, who appeared to feel\par
the cold, and I am almost sure she was introduced to me as Miss James)\par
remarked that the weather was very changeable.  Miss Brett then offered\par
me a cup of tea, which I accepted, I cannot recall in what words.\par
Miss Brett is a short and stout lady with white hair.  The only other\par
figure in the group that caught my attention was a Miss Mowbray,\par
a small and neat lady of aristocratic manners, silver hair, and a high\par
voice and colour.  She was the most emphatic member of the party;\par
and her views on the subject of pinafores, though expressed with a\par
natural deference to myself, were in themselves strong and advanced.\par
Beside her (although all five ladies were dressed simply in black)\par
it could not be denied that the others looked in some way what you\par
men of the world would call dowdy.\par
\par
"After about ten minutes' conversation I rose to go, and as I did so I\par
heard something which--I cannot describe it--something which seemed to--\par
but I really cannot describe it."\par
\par
"What did you hear?"  I asked, with some impatience.\par
\par
"I heard," said the vicar solemnly, "I heard Miss Mowbray\par
(the lady with the silver hair) say to Miss James (the lady\par
with the woollen shawl), the following extraordinary words.\par
I committed them to memory on the spot, and as soon as circumstances\par
set me free to do so, I noted them down on a piece of paper.\par
I believe I have it here."  He fumbled in his breast-pocket, bringing out\par
mild things, note-books, circulars and programmes of village concerts.\par
"I heard Miss Mowbray say to Miss James, the following words:\par
`Now's your time, Bill.'"\par
\par
He gazed at me for a few moments after making this announcement,\par
gravely and unflinchingly, as if conscious that here he was unshaken\par
about his facts.  Then he resumed, turning his bald head more\par
towards the fire.\par
\par
"This appeared to me remarkable.  I could not by any means understand it.\par
It seemed to me first of all peculiar that one maiden lady should\par
address another maiden lady as `Bill'. My experience, as I have said,\par
may be incomplete; maiden ladies may have among themselves and in\par
exclusively spinster circles wilder customs than I am aware of.\par
But it seemed to me odd, and I could almost have sworn (if you will\par
not misunderstand the phrase), I should have been strongly impelled\par
to maintain at the time that the words, `Now's your time, Bill', were by\par
no means pronounced with that upper-class intonation which, as I have\par
already said, had up to now characterized Miss Mowbray's conversation.\par
In fact, the words, `Now's your time, Bill', would have been,\par
I fancy, unsuitable if pronounced with that upper-class intonation.\par
\par
"I was surprised, I repeat, then, at the remark.  But I was still more\par
surprised when, looking round me in bewilderment, my hat and umbrella\par
in hand, I saw the lean lady with the woollen shawl leaning upright\par
against the door out of which I was just about to make my exit.\par
She was still knitting, and I supposed that this erect posture\par
against the door was only an eccentricity of spinsterhood and an\par
oblivion of my intended departure.\par
\par
"I said genially, `I am so sorry to disturb you, Miss James,\par
but I must really be going.  I have--er--' I stopped here,\par
for the words she had uttered in reply, though singularly brief and\par
in tone extremely business-like, were such as to render that arrest\par
of my remarks, I think, natural and excusable.  I have these words\par
also noted down.  I have not the least idea of their meaning;\par
so I have only been able to render them phonetically.  But she said,"\par
and Mr Shorter peered short-sightedly at his papers, "she said:\par
`Chuck it, fat 'ead,' and she added something that sounded like `It's\par
a kop', or (possibly) `a kopt'.  And then the last cord, either of my\par
sanity or the sanity of the universe, snapped suddenly.  My esteemed\par
friend and helper, Miss Brett, standing by the mantelpiece, said:\par
`Put 'is old 'ead in a bag, Sam, and tie 'im up before you start jawin'.\par
You'll be kopt yourselves some o' these days with this way of coin'\par
things, har lar theater.'\par
\par
"My head went round and round.  Was it really true, as I had suddenly\par
fancied a moment before, that unmarried ladies had some dreadful\par
riotous society of their own from which all others were excluded?\par
I remembered dimly in my classical days (I was a scholar in a small\par
way once, but now, alas! rusty), I remembered the mysteries of\par
the Bona Dea and their strange female freemasonry.  I remembered\par
the witches' Sabbaths.  I was just, in my absurd lightheadedness,\par
trying to remember a line of verse about Diana's nymphs,\par
when Miss Mowbray threw her arm round me from behind.\par
The moment it held me I knew it was not a woman's arm.\par
\par
"Miss Brett--or what I had called Miss Brett--was standing in front\par
of me with a big revolver in her hand and a broad grin on her face.\par
Miss James was still leaning against the door, but had fallen\par
into an attitude so totally new, and so totally unfeminine,\par
that it gave one a shock.  She was kicking her heels, with her\par
hands in her pockets and her cap on one side.  She was a man.\par
I mean he was a wo--no, that is I saw that instead of being\par
a woman she--he, I mean--that is, it was a man."\par
\par
Mr Shorter became indescribably flurried and flapping in endeavouring\par
to arrange these genders and his plaid shawl at the same time.\par
He resumed with a higher fever of nervousness:\par
\par
"As for Miss Mowbray, she--he, held me in a ring of iron.\par
He had her arm--that is she had his arm--round her neck--\par
my neck I mean--and I could not cry out.  Miss Brett--that is,\par
Mr Brett, at least Mr something who was not Miss Brett--\par
had the revolver pointed at me.  The other two ladies--\par
or er--gentlemen, were rummaging in some bag in the background.\par
It was all clear at last:  they were criminals dressed up as women,\par
to kidnap me!  To kidnap the Vicar of Chuntsey, in Essex.  But why?\par
Was it to be Nonconformists?\par
\par
"The brute leaning against the door called out carelessly, `'Urry up,\par
'Arry. Show the old bloke what the game is, and let's get off.'\par
\par
"`Curse 'is eyes,' said Miss Brett--I mean the man with the revolver--`why\par
should we show 'im the game?'\par
\par
"`If you take my advice you bloomin' well will,' said the man at\par
the door, whom they called Bill.  `A man wot knows wet 'e's doin'\par
is worth ten wot don't, even if 'e's a potty old parson.'\par
\par
"`Bill's right enough,' said the coarse voice of the man who held me\par
(it had been Miss Mowbray's). `Bring out the picture, 'Arry.'\par
\par
"The man with the revolver walked across the room to where\par
the other two women--I mean men--were turning over baggage,\par
and asked them for something which they gave him.  He came\par
back with it across the room and held it out in front of me.\par
And compared to the surprise of that display, all the previous\par
surprises of this awful day shrank suddenly.\par
\par
"It was a portrait of myself.  That such a picture should be\par
in the hands of these scoundrels might in any case have caused\par
a mild surprise; but no more.  It was no mild surprise that I felt.\par
The likeness was an extremely good one, worked up with all\par
the accessories of the conventional photographic studio.\par
I was leaning my head on my hand and was relieved against\par
a painted landscape of woodland.  It was obvious that it was\par
no snapshot; it was clear that I had sat for this photograph.\par
And the truth was that I had never sat for such a photograph.\par
It was a photograph that I had never had taken.\par
\par
"I stared at it again and again.  It seemed to me to be touched up\par
a good deal; it was glazed as well as framed, and the glass blurred some\par
of the details.  But there unmistakably was my face, my eyes, my nose\par
and mouth, my head and hand, posed for a professional photographer.\par
And I had never posed so for any photographer.\par
\par
"`Be'old the bloomin' miracle,' said the man with the revolver,\par
with ill-timed facetiousness.  `Parson, prepare to meet your God.'\par
And with this he slid the glass out of the frame.  As the glass moved,\par
I saw that part of the picture was painted on it in Chinese white,\par
notably a pair of white whiskers and a clerical collar.\par
And underneath was a portrait of an old lady in a quiet black dress,\par
leaning her head on her hand against the woodland landscape.\par
The old lady was as like me as one pin is like another.\par
It had required only the whiskers and the collar to make it me\par
in every hair.\par
\par
"`Entertainin', ain't it?' said the man described as 'Arry,\par
as he shot the glass back again.  `Remarkable resemblance, parson.\par
Gratifyin' to the lady.  Gratifyin' to you.  And hi may hadd,\par
particlery gratifyin' to us, as bein' the probable source of a\par
very tolerable haul.  You know Colonel Hawker, the man who's come\par
to live in these parts, don't you?'\par
\par
"I nodded.\par
\par
"`Well,' said the man 'Arry, pointing to the picture, `that's 'is mother.\par
'Oo ran to catch 'im when 'e fell?  She did,' and he flung his\par
fingers in a general gesture towards the photograph of the old lady\par
who was exactly like me.\par
\par
"`Tell the old gent wot 'e's got to do and be done with it,' broke out\par
Bill from the door.  `Look 'ere, Reverend Shorter, we ain't goin'\par
to do you no 'arm. We'll give you a sov.  for your trouble if you like.\par
And as for the old woman's clothes--why, you'll look lovely in 'em.'\par
\par
"`You ain't much of a 'and at a description, Bill,' said the man\par
behind me.  `Mr Shorter, it's like this.  We've got to see\par
this man Hawker tonight.  Maybe 'e'll kiss us all and 'ave up\par
the champagne when 'e sees us.  Maybe on the other 'and--'e\par
won't. Maybe 'e'll be dead when we goes away.  Maybe not.\par
But we've got to see 'im. Now as you know, 'e shuts 'isself up and\par
never opens the door to a soul; only you don't know why and we does.\par
The only one as can ever get at 'im is 'is mother.  Well, it's a\par
confounded funny coincidence,' he said, accenting the penultimate,\par
`it's a very unusual piece of good luck, but you're 'is mother.'\par
\par
"`When first I saw 'er picture,' said the man Bill, shaking his head\par
in a ruminant manner, `when I first saw it I said--old Shorter.\par
Those were my exact words--old Shorter.'\par
\par
"`What do you mean, you wild creatures?'  I gasped.  `What am\par
I to do?'\par
\par
"`That's easy said, your 'oldness,' said the man with\par
the revolver, good-humouredly; `you've got to put on those clothes,'\par
and he pointed to a poke-bonnet and a heap of female clothes\par
in the corner of the room.\par
\par
"I will not dwell, Mr Swinburne, upon the details of what followed.\par
I had no choice.  I could not fight five men, to say nothing of a\par
loaded pistol.  In five minutes, sir, the Vicar of Chuntsey was\par
dressed as an old woman--as somebody else's mother, if you please--\par
and was dragged out of the house to take part in a crime.\par
\par
"It was already late in the afternoon, and the nights of winter\par
were closing in fast.  On a dark road, in a blowing wind, we set\par
out towards the lonely house of Colonel Hawker, perhaps the queerest\par
cortege that ever straggled up that or any other road.  To every\par
human eye, in every external, we were six very respectable old ladies\par
of small means, in black dresses and refined but antiquated bonnets;\par
and we were really five criminals and a clergyman.\par
\par
"I will cut a long story short.  My brain was whirling like a\par
windmill as I walked, trying to think of some manner of escape.\par
To cry out, so long as we were far from houses, would be suicidal,\par
for it would be easy for the ruffians to knife me or to gag\par
me and fling me into a ditch.  On the other hand, to attempt\par
to stop strangers and explain the situation was impossible,\par
because of the frantic folly of the situation itself.  Long before I\par
had persuaded the chance postman or carrier of so absurd a story,\par
my companions would certainly have got off themselves, and in all\par
probability would have carried me off, as a friend of theirs who\par
had the misfortune to be mad or drunk.  The last thought, however,\par
was an inspiration; though a very terrible one.  Had it come to this,\par
that the Vicar of Chuntsey must pretend to be mad or drunk?\par
It had come to this.\par
\par
"I walked along with the rest up the deserted road,\par
imitating and keeping pace, as far as I could, with their rapid\par
and yet lady-like step, until at length I saw a lamp-post\par
and a policeman standing under it.  I had made up my mind.\par
Until we reached them we were all equally demure and silent and swift.\par
When we reached them I suddenly flung myself against the railings\par
and roared out:  `Hooray!  Hooray!  Hooray!  Rule Britannia!  Get your\par
'air cut.  Hoop-la!  Boo!'  It was a condition of no little novelty\par
for a man in my position.\par
\par
"The constable instantly flashed his lantern on me, or the draggled,\par
drunken old woman that was my travesty.  `Now then, mum,'\par
he began gruffly.\par
\par
"`Come along quiet, or I'll eat your heart,' cried Sam in my\par
ear hoarsely.  `Stop, or I'll flay you.'  It was frightful to hear\par
the words and see the neatly shawled old spinster who whispered them.\par
\par
"I yelled, and yelled--I was in for it now.  I screamed comic refrains\par
that vulgar young men had sung, to my regret, at our village concerts;\par
I rolled to and fro like a ninepin about to fall.\par
\par
"`If you can't get your friend on quiet, ladies,' said the policeman,\par
`I shall have to take 'er up.  Drunk and disorderly she is right enough.'\par
\par
"I redoubled my efforts.  I had not been brought up to this sort\par
of thing; but I believe I eclipsed myself.  Words that I did not know\par
I had ever heard of seemed to come pouring out of my open mouth.\par
\par
"`When we get you past,' whispered Bill, `you'll howl louder;\par
you'll howl louder when we're burning your feet off.'\par
\par
"I screamed in my terror those awful songs of joy.  In all\par
the nightmares that men have ever dreamed, there has never been\par
anything so blighting and horrible as the faces of those five men,\par
looking out of their poke-bonnets; the figures of district visitors\par
with the faces of devils.  I cannot think there is anything\par
so heart-breaking in hell.\par
\par
"For a sickening instant I thought that the bustle of my companions\par
and the perfect respectability of all our dresses would overcome\par
the policeman and induce him to let us pass.  He wavered, so far\par
as one can describe anything so solid as a policeman as wavering.\par
I lurched suddenly forward and ran my head into his chest,\par
calling out (if I remember correctly), `Oh, crikey, blimey, Bill.'\par
It was at that moment that I remembered most dearly that I was\par
the Vicar of Chuntsey, in Essex.\par
\par
"My desperate coup saved me.  The policeman had me hard by the back\par
of the neck.\par
\par
"`You come along with me,' he began, but Bill cut in with his perfect\par
imitation of a lady's finnicking voice.\par
\par
"`Oh, pray, constable, don't make a disturbance with our poor friend.\par
We will get her quietly home.  She does drink too much, but she\par
is quite a lady--only eccentric.'\par
\par
"`She butted me in the stomach,' said the policeman briefly.\par
\par
"`Eccentricities of genius,' said Sam earnestly.\par
\par
"`Pray let me take her home,' reiterated Bill, in the resumed\par
character of Miss James, `she wants looking after.'  `She does,'\par
said the policeman, `but I'll look after her.'\par
\par
"`That's no good,' cried Bill feverishly.  `She wants her friends.\par
She wants a particular medicine we've got.'\par
\par
"`Yes,' assented Miss Mowbray, with excitement, `no other medicine\par
any good, constable.  Complaint quite unique.'\par
\par
"`I'm all righ'.  Cutchy, cutchy, coo!' remarked, to his eternal shame,\par
the Vicar of Chuntsey.\par
\par
"`Look here, ladies,' said the constable sternly, `I don't\par
like the eccentricity of your friend, and I don't like 'er songs,\par
or 'er 'ead in my stomach.  And now I come to think of it,\par
I don't like the looks of you I've seen many as quiet dressed as you\par
as was wrong 'uns. Who are you?'\par
\par
"`We've not our cards with us,' said Miss Mowbray,\par
with indescribable dignity.  `Nor do we see why we should be insulted\par
by any Jack-in-office who chooses to be rude to ladies, when he is paid\par
to protect them.  If you choose to take advantage of the weakness of our\par
unfortunate friend, no doubt you are legally entitled to take her.\par
But if you fancy you have any legal right to bully us, you will find\par
yourself in the wrong box.'\par
\par
"The truth and dignity of this staggered the policeman for a moment.\par
Under cover of their advantage my five persecutors turned for an\par
instant on me faces like faces of the damned and then swished off\par
into the darkness.  When the constable first turned his lantern\par
and his suspicions on to them, I had seen the telegraphic look flash\par
from face to face saying that only retreat was possible now.\par
\par
"By this time I was sinking slowly to the pavement, in a state\par
of acute reflection.  So long as the ruffians were with me, I dared\par
not quit the role of drunkard.  For if I had begun to talk reasonably\par
and explain the real case, the officer would merely have thought that I\par
was slightly recovered and would have put me in charge of my friends.\par
Now, however, if I liked I might safely undeceive him.\par
\par
"But I confess I did not like.  The chances of life are many, and it\par
may doubtless sometimes lie in the narrow path of duty for a clergyman\par
of the Church of England to pretend to be a drunken old woman;\par
but such necessities are, I imagine, sufficiently rare to appear\par
to many improbable.  Suppose the story got about that I had pretended\par
to be drunk.  Suppose people did not all think it was pretence!\par
\par
"I lurched up, the policeman half-lifting me.  I went along weakly\par
and quietly for about a hundred yards.  The officer evidently\par
thought that I was too sleepy and feeble to effect an escape,\par
and so held me lightly and easily enough.  Past one turning,\par
two turnings, three turnings, four turnings, he trailed me with him,\par
a limp and slow and reluctant figure.  At the fourth turning, I suddenly\par
broke from his hand and tore down the street like a maddened stag.\par
He was unprepared, he was heavy, and it was dark.  I ran and ran\par
and ran, and in five minutes' running, found I was gaining.\par
In half an hour I was out in the fields under the holy and blessed stars,\par
where I tore off my accursed shawl and bonnet and buried them\par
in clean earth."\par
\par
The old gentleman had finished his story and leant back in his chair.\par
Both the matter and the manner of his narration had, as time went on,\par
impressed me favourably.  He was an old duffer and pedant, but behind\par
these things he was a country-bred man and gentleman, and had showed\par
courage and a sporting instinct in the hour of desperation.\par
He had told his story with many quaint formalities of diction,\par
but also with a very convincing realism.\par
\par
"And now--" I began.\par
\par
"And now," said Shorter, leaning forward again with something like servile\par
energy, "and now, Mr Swinburne, what about that unhappy man Hawker.\par
I cannot tell what those men meant, or how far what they said was real.\par
But surely there is danger.  I cannot go to the police, for reasons\par
that you perceive.  Among other things, they wouldn't believe me.\par
What is to be done?"\par
\par
I took out my watch.  It was already half past twelve.\par
\par
"My friend Basil Grant," I said, "is the best man we can go to.\par
He and I were to have gone to the same dinner tonight; but he will\par
just have come back by now.  Have you any objection to taking a cab?"\par
\par
"Not at all," he replied, rising politely, and gathering up his\par
absurd plaid shawl.\par
\par
A rattle in a hansom brought us underneath the sombre pile of workmen's\par
flats in Lambeth which Grant inhabited; a climb up a wearisome wooden\par
staircase brought us to his garret.  When I entered that wooden and\par
scrappy interior, the white gleam of Basil's shirt-front and the lustre\par
of his fur coat flung on the wooden settle, struck me as a contrast.\par
He was drinking a glass of wine before retiring.  I was right;\par
he had come back from the dinner-party.\par
\par
He listened to the repetition of the story of the Rev. Ellis Shorter\par
with the genuine simplicity and respect which he never failed\par
to exhibit in dealing with any human being.  When it was over\par
he said simply:\par
\par
"Do you know a man named Captain Fraser?"\par
\par
I was so startled at this totally irrelevant reference to the worthy\par
collector of chimpanzees with whom I ought to have dined that evening,\par
that I glanced sharply at Grant.  The result was that I did not look\par
at Mr Shorter.  I only heard him answer, in his most nervous tone, "No."\par
\par
Basil, however, seemed to find something very curious about his\par
answer or his demeanour generally, for he kept his big blue eyes\par
fixed on the old clergyman, and though the eyes were quite quiet\par
they stood out more and more from his head.\par
\par
"You are quite sure, Mr Shorter," he repeated, "that you don't\par
know Captain Fraser?"\par
\par
"Quite," answered the vicar, and I was certainly puzzled to find him\par
returning so much to the timidity, not to say the demoralization,\par
of his tone when he first entered my presence.\par
\par
Basil sprang smartly to his feet.\par
\par
"Then our course is clear," he said.  "You have not even begun\par
your investigation, my dear Mr Shorter; the first thing for us\par
to do is to go together to see Captain Fraser."\par
\par
"When?" asked the clergyman, stammering.\par
\par
"Now," said Basil, putting one arm in his fur coat.\par
\par
The old clergyman rose to his feet, quaking all over.\par
\par
"I really do not think that it is necessary," he said.\par
\par
Basil took his arm out of the fur coat, threw it over the chair again,\par
and put his hands in his pockets.\par
\par
"Oh," he said, with emphasis.  "Oh--you don't think it necessary;\par
then," and he added the words with great clearness and deliberation,\par
"then, Mr Ellis Shorter, I can only say that I would like to see\par
you without your whiskers."\par
\par
And at these words I also rose to my feet, for the great tragedy\par
of my life had come.  Splendid and exciting as life was in continual\par
contact with an intellect like Basil's, I had always the feeling\par
that that splendour and excitement were on the borderland of sanity.\par
He lived perpetually near the vision of the reason of things which\par
makes men lose their reason.  And I felt of his insanity as men feel\par
of the death of friends with heart disease.  It might come anywhere,\par
in a field, in a hansom cab, looking at a sunset, smoking a cigarette.\par
It had come now.  At the very moment of delivering a judgement\par
for the salvation of a fellow creature, Basil Grant had gone mad.\par
\par
"Your whiskers," he cried, advancing with blazing eyes.\par
"Give me your whiskers.  And your bald head."\par
\par
The old vicar naturally retreated a step or two.  I stepped between.\par
\par
"Sit down, Basil," I implored, "you're a little excited.\par
Finish your wine."\par
\par
"Whiskers," he answered sternly, "whiskers."\par
\par
And with that he made a dash at the old gentleman, who made a dash\par
for the door, but was intercepted.  And then, before I knew where I\par
was the quiet room was turned into something between a pantomime\par
and a pandemonium by those two.  Chairs were flung over with a crash,\par
tables were vaulted with a noise like thunder, screens were smashed,\par
crockery scattered in smithereens, and still Basil Grant bounded\par
and bellowed after the Rev. Ellis Shorter.\par
\par
And now I began to perceive something else, which added the last\par
half-witted touch to my mystification.  The Rev. Ellis Shorter,\par
of Chuntsey, in Essex, was by no means behaving as I had previously\par
noticed him to behave, or as, considering his age and station,\par
I should have expected him to behave.  His power of dodging, leaping,\par
and fighting would have been amazing in a lad of seventeen, and in this\par
doddering old vicar looked like a sort of farcical fairy-tale. Moreover,\par
he did not seem to be so much astonished as I had thought.\par
There was even a look of something like enjoyment in his eyes;\par
so there was in the eye of Basil.  In fact, the unintelligible\par
truth must be told.  They were both laughing.\par
\par
At length Shorter was cornered.\par
\par
"Come, come, Mr Grant," he panted, "you can't do anything to me.\par
It's quite legal.  And it doesn't do any one the least harm.\par
It's only a social fiction.  A result of our complex society, Mr Grant."\par
\par
"I don't blame you, my man," said Basil coolly.  "But I want\par
your whiskers.  And your bald head.  Do they belong to Captain Fraser?"\par
\par
"No, no," said Mr Shorter, laughing, "we provide them ourselves.\par
They don't belong to Captain Fraser."\par
\par
"What the deuce does all this mean?"  I almost screamed.\par
"Are you all in an infernal nightmare?  Why should Mr Shorter's bald\par
head belong to Captain Fraser?  How could it?  What the deuce has\par
Captain Fraser to do with the affair?  What is the matter with him?\par
You dined with him, Basil."\par
\par
"No," said Grant, "I didn't."\par
\par
"Didn't you go to Mrs Thornton's dinner-party?"  I asked, staring.\par
"Why not?"\par
\par
"Well," said Basil, with a slow and singular smile, "the fact\par
is I was detained by a visitor.  I have him, as a point of fact,\par
in my bedroom."\par
\par
"In your bedroom?"  I repeated; but my imagination had reached that point\par
when he might have said in his coal scuttle or his waistcoat pocket.\par
\par
Grant stepped to the door of an inner room, flung it open and walked in.\par
Then he came out again with the last of the bodily wonders of that\par
wild night.  He introduced into the sitting-room, in an apologetic manner,\par
and by the nape of the neck, a limp clergyman with a bald head,\par
white whiskers and a plaid shawl.\par
\par
"Sit down, gentlemen," cried Grant, striking his hands heartily.\par
"Sit down all of you and have a glass of wine.  As you say,\par
there is no harm in it, and if Captain Fraser had simply dropped me\par
a hint I could have saved him from dropping a good sum of money.\par
Not that you would have liked that, eh?"\par
\par
The two duplicate clergymen, who were sipping their Burgundy\par
with two duplicate grins, laughed heartily at this, and one of them\par
carelessly pulled off his whiskers and laid them on the table.\par
\par
"Basil," I said, "if you are my friend, save me.  What is all this?"\par
\par
He laughed again.\par
\par
"Only another addition, Cherub, to your collection of Queer Trades.\par
These two gentlemen (whose health I have now the pleasure of drinking)\par
are Professional Detainers."\par
\par
"And what on earth's that?"  I asked.\par
\par
"It's really very simple, Mr Swinburne," began he who had once been\par
the Rev. Ellis Shorter, of Chuntsey, in Essex; and it gave me a shock\par
indescribable to hear out of that pompous and familiar form come\par
no longer its own pompous and familiar voice, but the brisk sharp\par
tones of a young city man.  "It is really nothing very important.\par
We are paid by our clients to detain in conversation, on some\par
harmless pretext, people whom they want out of the way for a few hours.\par
And Captain Fraser--" and with that he hesitated and smiled.\par
\par
Basil smiled also.  He intervened.\par
\par
"The fact is that Captain Fraser, who is one of my best friends,\par
wanted us both out of the way very much.  He is sailing tonight\par
for East Africa, and the lady with whom we were all to have dined is--\par
er--what is I believe described as `the romance of his life'.\par
He wanted that two hours with her, and employed these two reverend\par
gentlemen to detain us at our houses so as to let him have\par
the field to himself."\par
\par
"And of course," said the late Mr Shorter apologetically to me, "as I\par
had to keep a gentleman at home from keeping an appointment with a lady,\par
I had to come with something rather hot and strong--rather urgent.\par
It wouldn't have done to be tame."\par
\par
"Oh," I said, "I acquit you of tameness."\par
\par
"Thank you, sir," said the man respectfully, "always very grateful\par
for any recommendation, sir."\par
\par
The other man idly pushed back his artificial bald head,\par
revealing close red hair, and spoke dreamily, perhaps under\par
the influence of Basil's admirable Burgundy.\par
\par
"It's wonderful how common it's getting, gentlemen.\par
Our office is busy from morning till night.  I've no doubt you've\par
often knocked up against us before.  You just take notice.\par
When an old bachelor goes on boring you with hunting stories,\par
when you're burning to be introduced to somebody, he's from our bureau.\par
When a lady calls on parish work and stops hours, just when\par
you wanted to go to the Robinsons', she's from our bureau.\par
The Robinson hand, sir, may be darkly seen."\par
\par
"There is one thing I don't understand," I said.  "Why you\par
are both vicars."\par
\par
A shade crossed the brow of the temporary incumbent of Chuntsey, in Essex.\par
\par
"That may have been a mistake, sir," he said.  "But it was not our fault.\par
It was all the munificence of Captain Fraser.  He requested that\par
the highest price and talent on our tariff should be employed to detain\par
you gentlemen.  Now the highest payment in our office goes to those who\par
impersonate vicars, as being the most respectable and more of a strain.\par
We are paid five guineas a visit.  We have had the good fortune\par
to satisfy the firm with our work; and we are now permanently vicars.\par
Before that we had two years as colonels, the next in our scale.\par
Colonels are four guineas."\par
\par
\par
Chapter 4\par
\par
The Singular Speculation of the House-Agent\par
\par
\par
Lieutenant Drummond Keith was a man about whom conversation\par
always burst like a thunderstorm the moment he left the room.\par
This arose from many separate touches about him.  He was a light,\par
loose person, who wore light, loose clothes, generally white,\par
as if he were in the tropics; he was lean and graceful, like a panther,\par
and he had restless black eyes.\par
\par
He was very impecunious.  He had one of the habits of the poor,\par
in a degree so exaggerated as immeasurably to eclipse the most miserable\par
of the unemployed; I mean the habit of continual change of lodgings.\par
There are inland tracts of London where, in the very heart of\par
artificial civilization, humanity has almost become nomadic once more.\par
But in that restless interior there was no ragged tramp so restless\par
as the elegant officer in the loose white clothes.  He had shot\par
a great many things in his time, to judge from his conversation,\par
from partridges to elephants, but his slangier acquaintances\par
were of opinion that "the moon" had been not unfrequently amid\par
the victims of his victorious rifle.  The phrase is a fine one,\par
and suggests a mystic, elvish, nocturnal hunting.\par
\par
He carried from house to house and from parish to parish a kit\par
which consisted practically of five articles.  Two odd-looking,\par
large-bladed spears, tied together, the weapons, I suppose,\par
of some savage tribe, a green umbrella, a huge and tattered copy\par
of the Pickwick Papers, a big game rifle, and a large sealed\par
jar of some unholy Oriental wine.  These always went into every\par
new lodging, even for one night; and they went in quite undisguised,\par
tied up in wisps of string or straw, to the delight of the poetic\par
gutter boys in the little grey streets.\par
\par
I had forgotten to mention that he always carried also his old\par
regimental sword.  But this raised another odd question about him.\par
Slim and active as he was, he was no longer very young.\par
His hair, indeed, was quite grey, though his rather wild almost\par
Italian moustache retained its blackness, and his face was careworn\par
under its almost Italian gaiety.  To find a middle-aged man who has\par
left the Army at the primitive rank of lieutenant is unusual and not\par
necessarily encouraging.  With the more cautious and solid this fact,\par
like his endless flitting, did the mysterious gentleman no good.\par
\par
Lastly, he was a man who told the kind of adventures which win\par
a man admiration, but not respect.  They came out of queer places,\par
where a good man would scarcely find himself, out of opium\par
dens and gambling hells; they had the heat of the thieves'\par
kitchens or smelled of a strange smoke from cannibal incantations.\par
These are the kind of stories which discredit a person almost\par
equally whether they are believed or no.  If Keith's tales were\par
false he was a liar; if they were true he had had, at any rate,\par
every opportunity of being a scamp.\par
\par
He had just left the room in which I sat with Basil Grant\par
and his brother Rupert, the voluble amateur detective.\par
And as I say was invariably the case, we were all talking about him.\par
Rupert Grant was a clever young fellow, but he had that tendency\par
which youth and cleverness, when sharply combined, so often produce,\par
a somewhat extravagant scepticism.  He saw doubt and guilt everywhere,\par
and it was meat and drink to him.  I had often got irritated with this\par
boyish incredulity of his, but on this particular occasion I am bound\par
to say that I thought him so obviously right that I was astounded\par
at Basil's opposing him, however banteringly.\par
\par
I could swallow a good deal, being naturally of a simple turn,\par
but I could not swallow Lieutenant Keith's autobiography.\par
\par
"You don't seriously mean, Basil," I said, "that you think that\par
that fellow really did go as a stowaway with Nansen and pretend\par
to be the Mad Mullah and--"\par
\par
"He has one fault," said Basil thoughtfully, "or virtue, as you may\par
happen to regard it.  He tells the truth in too exact and bald a style;\par
he is too veracious."\par
\par
"Oh! if you are going to be paradoxical," said Rupert contemptuously,\par
"be a bit funnier than that.  Say, for instance, that he has lived\par
all his life in one ancestral manor."\par
\par
"No, he's extremely fond of change of scene,"\par
replied Basil dispassionately, "and of living in odd places.\par
That doesn't prevent his chief trait being verbal exactitude.\par
What you people don't understand is that telling a thing crudely\par
and coarsely as it happened makes it sound frightfully strange.\par
The sort of things Keith recounts are not the sort of things that a man\par
would make up to cover himself with honour; they are too absurd.\par
But they are the sort of things that a man would do if he were\par
sufficiently filled with the soul of skylarking."\par
\par
"So far from paradox," said his brother, with something rather\par
like a sneer, "you seem to be going in for journalese proverbs.\par
Do you believe that truth is stranger than fiction?"\par
\par
"Truth must of necessity be stranger than fiction," said Basil placidly.\par
"For fiction is the creation of the human mind, and therefore\par
is congenial to it."\par
\par
"Well, your lieutenant's truth is stranger, if it is truth,\par
than anything I ever heard of," said Rupert, relapsing into flippancy.\par
"Do you, on your soul, believe in all that about the shark\par
and the camera?"\par
\par
"I believe Keith's words," answered the other.  "He is an honest man."\par
\par
"I should like to question a regiment of his landladies,"\par
said Rupert cynically.\par
\par
"I must say, I think you can hardly regard him as unimpeachable\par
merely in himself," I said mildly; "his mode of life--"\par
\par
Before I could complete the sentence the door was flung open and\par
Drummond Keith appeared again on the threshold, his white Panama\par
on his head.\par
\par
"I say, Grant," he said, knocking off his cigarette ash against\par
the door, "I've got no money in the world till next April.\par
Could you lend me a hundred pounds?  There's a good chap."\par
\par
Rupert and I looked at each other in an ironical silence.\par
Basil, who was sitting by his desk, swung the chair round idly\par
on its screw and picked up a quill-pen.\par
\par
"Shall I cross it?" he asked, opening a cheque-book.\par
\par
"Really," began Rupert, with a rather nervous loudness,\par
"since Lieutenant Keith has seen fit to make this suggestion to Basil\par
before his family, I--"\par
\par
"Here you are, Ugly," said Basil, fluttering a cheque in the direction\par
of the quite nonchalant officer.  "Are you in a hurry?"\par
\par
"Yes," replied Keith, in a rather abrupt way.  "As a matter of fact\par
I want it now.  I want to see my--er--business man."\par
\par
Rupert was eyeing him sarcastically, and I could see that it\par
was on the tip of his tongue to say, inquiringly, "Receiver of\par
stolen goods, perhaps."  What he did say was:\par
\par
"A business man?  That's rather a general description, Lieutenant Keith."\par
\par
Keith looked at him sharply, and then said, with something\par
rather like ill-temper:\par
\par
"He's a thingum-my-bob, a house-agent, say.  I'm going to see him."\par
\par
"Oh, you're going to see a house-agent, are you?"\par
said Rupert Grant grimly.  "Do you know, Mr Keith, I think I should\par
very much like to go with you?"\par
\par
Basil shook with his soundless laughter.  Lieutenant Keith started\par
a little; his brow blackened sharply.\par
\par
"I beg your pardon," he said.  "What did you say?"\par
\par
Rupert's face had been growing from stage to stage of ferocious irony,\par
and he answered:\par
\par
"I was saying that I wondered whether you would mind our strolling\par
along with you to this house-agent's."\par
\par
The visitor swung his stick with a sudden whirling violence.\par
\par
"Oh, in God's name, come to my house-agent's!  Come to my bedroom.\par
Look under my bed.  Examine my dust-bin. Come along!"\par
And with a furious energy which took away our breath he banged\par
his way out of the room.\par
\par
Rupert Grant, his restless blue eyes dancing with his detective\par
excitement, soon shouldered alongside him, talking to him with\par
that transparent camaraderie which he imagined to be appropriate\par
from the disguised policeman to the disguised criminal.\par
His interpretation was certainly corroborated by one particular detail,\par
the unmistakable unrest, annoyance, and nervousness of the man\par
with whom he walked.  Basil and I tramped behind, and it was not\par
necessary for us to tell each other that we had both noticed this.\par
\par
Lieutenant Drummond Keith led us through very extraordinary\par
and unpromising neighbourhoods in the search for his remarkable\par
house-agent. Neither of the brothers Grant failed to notice this fact.\par
As the streets grew closer and more crooked and the roofs lower\par
and the gutters grosser with mud, a darker curiosity deepened\par
on the brows of Basil, and the figure of Rupert seen from behind\par
seemed to fill the street with a gigantic swagger of success.\par
At length, at the end of the fourth or fifth lean grey street\par
in that sterile district, we came suddenly to a halt, the mysterious\par
lieutenant looking once more about him with a sort of sulky desperation.\par
Above a row of shutters and a door, all indescribably dingy in\par
appearance and in size scarce sufficient even for a penny toyshop,\par
ran the inscription:  "P. Montmorency, House-Agent."\par
\par
"This is the office of which I spoke," said Keith, in a cutting voice.\par
"Will you wait here a moment, or does your astonishing tenderness\par
about my welfare lead you to wish to overhear everything I have\par
to say to my business adviser?"\par
\par
Rupert's face was white and shaking with excitement; nothing on earth\par
would have induced him now to have abandoned his prey.\par
\par
"If you will excuse me," he said, clenching his hands behind his back,\par
"I think I should feel myself justified in--"\par
\par
"Oh!  Come along in," exploded the lieutenant.  He made the same\par
gesture of savage surrender.  And he slammed into the office,\par
the rest of us at his heels.\par
\par
P. Montmorency, House-Agent, was a solitary old gentleman\par
sitting behind a bare brown counter.  He had an egglike head,\par
froglike jaws, and a grey hairy fringe of aureole round the lower\par
part of his face; the whole combined with a reddish, aquiline nose.\par
He wore a shabby black frock-coat, a sort of semi-clerical tie\par
worn at a very unclerical angle, and looked, generally speaking,\par
about as unlike a house-agent as anything could look, short of\par
something like a sandwich man or a Scotch Highlander.\par
\par
We stood inside the room for fully forty seconds, and the odd old\par
gentleman did not look at us.  Neither, to tell the truth, odd as he was,\par
did we look at him.  Our eyes were fixed, where his were fixed,\par
upon something that was crawling about on the counter in front of him.\par
It was a ferret.\par
\par
The silence was broken by Rupert Grant.  He spoke in that sweet\par
and steely voice which he reserved for great occasions and practised\par
for hours together in his bedroom.  He said:\par
\par
"Mr Montmorency, I think?"\par
\par
The old gentleman started, lifted his eyes with a bland bewilderment,\par
picked up the ferret by the neck, stuffed it alive into his\par
trousers pocket, smiled apologetically, and said:\par
\par
"Sir."\par
\par
"You are a house-agent, are you not?" asked Rupert.\par
\par
To the delight of that criminal investigator, Mr Montmorency's eyes\par
wandered unquietly towards Lieutenant Keith, the only man present\par
that he knew.\par
\par
"A house-agent," cried Rupert again, bringing out the word as if\par
it were "burglar'.\par
\par
"Yes ... oh, yes," said the man, with a quavering and almost\par
coquettish smile.  "I am a house-agent ... oh, yes."\par
\par
"Well, I think," said Rupert, with a sardonic sleekness,\par
"that Lieutenant Keith wants to speak to you.  We have come\par
in by his request."\par
\par
Lieutenant Keith was lowering gloomily, and now he spoke.\par
\par
"I have come, Mr Montmorency, about that house of mine."\par
\par
"Yes, sir," said Montmorency, spreading his fingers on the flat counter.\par
"It's all ready, sir.  I've attended to all your suggestions er--\par
about the br--"\par
\par
"Right," cried Keith, cutting the word short with the startling\par
neatness of a gunshot.  "We needn't bother about all that.\par
If you've done what I told you, all right."\par
\par
And he turned sharply towards the door.\par
\par
Mr Montmorency, House-Agent, presented a picture of pathos.\par
After stammering a moment he said:  "Excuse me ... Mr Keith ...\par
there was another matter ... about which I wasn't quite sure.\par
I tried to get all the heating apparatus possible under the circumstances\par
... but in winter ... at that elevation ..."\par
\par
"Can't expect much, eh?" said the lieutenant, cutting in with the same\par
sudden skill.  "No, of course not.  That's all right, Montmorency.\par
There can't be any more difficulties," and he put his hand on\par
the handle of the door.\par
\par
"I think," said Rupert Grant, with a satanic suavity, "that Mr Montmorency\par
has something further to say to you, lieutenant."\par
\par
"Only," said the house-agent, in desperation, "what about the birds?"\par
\par
"I beg your pardon," said Rupert, in a general blank.\par
\par
"What about the birds?" said the house-agent doggedly.\par
\par
Basil, who had remained throughout the procedings in a state of\par
Napoleonic calm, which might be more accurately described as a state\par
of Napoleonic stupidity, suddenly lifted his leonine head.\par
\par
"Before you go, Lieutenant Keith," he said.  "Come now.\par
Really, what about the birds?"\par
\par
"I'll take care of them," said Lieutenant Keith, still with his long\par
back turned to us; "they shan't suffer."\par
\par
"Thank you, sir, thank you," cried the incomprehensible house-agent,\par
with an air of ecstasy.  "You'll excuse my concern, sir.  You know\par
I'm wild on wild animals.  I'm as wild as any of them on that.\par
Thank you, sir.  But there's another thing..."\par
\par
The lieutenant, with his back turned to us, exploded with an\par
indescribable laugh and swung round to face us.  It was a laugh,\par
the purport of which was direct and essential, and yet which\par
one cannot exactly express.  As near as it said anything,\par
verbally speaking, it said:  "Well, if you must spoil it, you must.\par
But you don't know what you're spoiling."\par
\par
"There is another thing," continued Mr Montmorency weakly.\par
"Of course, if you don't want to be visited you'll paint\par
the house green, but--"\par
\par
"Green!" shouted Keith.  "Green!  Let it be green or nothing.\par
I won't have a house of another colour.  Green!" and before we could\par
realize anything the door had banged between us and the street.\par
\par
Rupert Grant seemed to take a little time to collect himself;\par
but he spoke before the echoes of the door died away.\par
\par
"Your client, Lieutenant Keith, appears somewhat excited," he said.\par
"What is the matter with him?  Is he unwell?"\par
\par
"Oh, I should think not," said Mr Montmorency, in some confusion.\par
"The negotiations have been somewhat difficult--the house is rather--"\par
\par
"Green," said Rupert calmly.  "That appears to be a very important point.\par
It must be rather green.  May I ask you, Mr Montmorency,\par
before I rejoin my companion outside, whether, in your business,\par
it is usual to ask for houses by their colour?  Do clients write\par
to a house-agent asking for a pink house or a blue house?\par
Or, to take another instance, for a green house?"\par
\par
"Only," said Montmorency, trembling, "only to be inconspicuous."\par
\par
Rupert had his ruthless smile.  "Can you tell me any place on earth\par
in which a green house would be inconspicuous?"\par
\par
The house-agent was fidgeting nervously in his pocket.\par
Slowly drawing out a couple of lizards and leaving them to run\par
on the counter, he said:\par
\par
"No; I can't."\par
\par
"You can't suggest an explanation?"\par
\par
"No," said Mr Montmorency, rising slowly and yet in such a way\par
as to suggest a sudden situation, "I can't. And may I, as a busy man,\par
be excused if I ask you, gentlemen, if you have any demand to make\par
of me in connection with my business.  What kind of house would\par
you desire me to get for you, sir?"\par
\par
He opened his blank blue eyes on Rupert, who seemed for the\par
second staggered.  Then he recovered himself with perfect common\par
sense and answered:\par
\par
"I am sorry, Mr Montmorency.  The fascination of your remarks\par
has unduly delayed us from joining our friend outside.\par
Pray excuse my apparent impertinence."\par
\par
"Not at all, sir," said the house-agent, taking a South American spider\par
idly from his waistcoat pocket and letting it climb up the slope\par
of his desk.  "Not at all, sir.  I hope you will favour me again."\par
\par
Rupert Grant dashed out of the office in a gust of anger,\par
anxious to face Lieutenant Keith.  He was gone.  The dull,\par
starlit street was deserted.\par
\par
"What do you say now?" cried Rupert to his brother.  His brother\par
said nothing now.\par
\par
We all three strode down the street in silence, Rupert feverish,\par
myself dazed, Basil, to all appearance, merely dull.\par
We walked through grey street after grey street, turning corners,\par
traversing squares, scarcely meeting anyone, except occasional\par
drunken knots of two or three.\par
\par
In one small street, however, the knots of two or three began abruptly\par
to thicken into knots of five or six and then into great groups\par
and then into a crowd.  The crowd was stirring very slightly.\par
But anyone with a knowledge of the eternal populace knows\par
that if the outside rim of a crowd stirs ever so slightly it\par
means that there is madness in the heart and core of the mob.\par
It soon became evident that something really important had\par
happened in the centre of this excitement.  We wormed our way\par
to the front, with the cunning which is known only to cockneys,\par
and once there we soon learned the nature of the difficulty.\par
There had been a brawl concerned with some six men, and one of them\par
lay almost dead on the stones of the street.  Of the other four,\par
all interesting matters were, as far as we were concerned, swallowed up\par
in one stupendous fact.  One of the four survivors of the brutal\par
and perhaps fatal scuffle was the immaculate Lieutenant Keith,\par
his clothes torn to ribbons, his eyes blazing, blood on his knuckles.\par
One other thing, however, pointed at him in a worse manner.\par
A short sword, or very long knife, had been drawn out of his\par
elegant walking-stick, and lay in front of him upon the stones.\par
It did not, however, appear to be bloody.\par
\par
The police had already pushed into the centre with their ponderous\par
omnipotence, and even as they did so, Rupert Grant sprang forward\par
with his incontrollable and intolerable secret.\par
\par
"That is the man, constable," he shouted, pointing at\par
the battered lieutenant.  "He is a suspicious character.\par
He did the murder."\par
\par
"There's been no murder done, sir," said the policeman,\par
with his automatic civility.  "The poor man's only hurt.\par
I shall only be able to take the names and addresses of the men\par
in the scuffle and have a good eye kept on them."\par
\par
"Have a good eye kept on that one," said Rupert, pale to the lips,\par
and pointing to the ragged Keith.\par
\par
"All right, sir," said the policeman unemotionally, and went\par
the round of the people present, collecting the addresses.\par
When he had completed his task the dusk had fallen and most of the people\par
not immediately connected with the examination had gone away.\par
He still found, however, one eager-faced stranger lingering on\par
the outskirts of the affair.  It was Rupert Grant.\par
\par
"Constable," he said, "I have a very particular reason for asking you\par
a question.  Would you mind telling me whether that military fellow\par
who dropped his sword-stick in the row gave you an address or not?"\par
\par
"Yes, sir," said the policeman, after a reflective pause; "yes, he gave\par
me his address."\par
\par
"My name is Rupert Grant," said that individual, with some pomp.\par
"I have assisted the police on more than one occasion.\par
I wonder whether you would tell me, as a special favour, what address?"\par
\par
The constable looked at him.\par
\par
"Yes," he said slowly, "if you like.  His address is:\par
The Elms, Buxton Common, near Purley, Surrey."\par
\par
"Thank you," said Rupert, and ran home through the gathering night\par
as fast as his legs could carry him, repeating the address to himself.\par
\par
Rupert Grant generally came down late in a rather lordly way to breakfast;\par
he contrived, I don't know how, to achieve always the attitude\par
of the indulged younger brother.  Next morning, however, when Basil\par
and I came down we found him ready and restless.\par
\par
"Well," he said sharply to his brother almost before we sat down\par
to the meal.  "What do you think of your Drummond Keith now?"\par
\par
"What do I think of him?" inquired Basil slowly.  "I don't think\par
anything of him."\par
\par
"I'm glad to hear it," said Rupert, buttering his toast with an energy\par
that was somewhat exultant.  "I thought you'd come round to my view,\par
but I own I was startled at your not seeing it from the beginning.\par
The man is a translucent liar and knave."\par
\par
"I think," said Basil, in the same heavy monotone as before,\par
"that I did not make myself clear.  When I said that I thought\par
nothing of him I meant grammatically what I said.  I meant that I did\par
not think about him; that he did not occupy my mind.  You, however,\par
seem to me to think a lot of him, since you think him a knave.\par
I should say he was glaringly good myself."\par
\par
"I sometimes think you talk paradox for its own sake,"\par
said Rupert, breaking an egg with unnecessary sharpness.\par
"What the deuce is the sense of it?  Here's a man whose original\par
position was, by our common agreement, dubious.  He's a wanderer,\par
a teller of tall tales, a man who doesn't conceal his acquaintance\par
with all the blackest and bloodiest scenes on earth.\par
We take the trouble to follow him to one of his appointments,\par
and if ever two human beings were plotting together and lying to\par
every one else, he and that impossible house-agent were doing it.\par
We followed him home, and the very same night he is in the thick\par
of a fatal, or nearly fatal, brawl, in which he is the only man armed.\par
Really, if this is being glaringly good, I must confess that the glare\par
does not dazzle me."\par
\par
Basil was quite unmoved.  "I admit his moral goodness is of a\par
certain kind, a quaint, perhaps a casual kind.  He is very fond\par
of change and experiment.  But all the points you so ingeniously\par
make against him are mere coincidence or special pleading.\par
It's true he didn't want to talk about his house business in front of us.\par
No man would.  It's true that he carries a sword-stick. Any man might.\par
It's true he drew it in the shock of a street fight.\par
Any man would.  But there's nothing really dubious in all this.\par
There's nothing to confirm--"\par
\par
As he spoke a knock came at the door.\par
\par
"If you please, sir," said the landlady, with an alarmed air,\par
"there's a policeman wants to see you."\par
\par
"Show him in," said Basil, amid the blank silence.\par
\par
The heavy, handsome constable who appeared at the door spoke almost\par
as soon as he appeared there.\par
\par
"I think one of you gentlemen," he said, curtly but respectfully,\par
"was present at the affair in Copper Street last night, and drew\par
my attention very strongly to a particular man."\par
\par
Rupert half rose from his chair, with eyes like diamonds,\par
but the constable went on calmly, referring to a paper.\par
\par
"A young man with grey hair.  Had light grey clothes, very good,\par
but torn in the struggle.  Gave his name as Drummond Keith."\par
\par
"This is amusing," said Basil, laughing.  "I was in the very act of\par
clearing that poor officer's character of rather fanciful aspersions.\par
What about him?"\par
\par
"Well, sir," said the constable, "I took all the men's addresses and\par
had them all watched.  It wasn't serious enough to do more than that.\par
All the other addresses are all right.  But this man Keith gave\par
a false address.  The place doesn't exist."\par
\par
The breakfast table was nearly flung over as Rupert sprang up,\par
slapping both his thighs.\par
\par
"Well, by all that's good," he cried.  "This is a sign from heaven."\par
\par
"It's certainly very extraordinary," said Basil quietly,\par
with knitted brows.  "It's odd the fellow should have given\par
a false address, considering he was perfectly innocent in the--"\par
\par
"Oh, you jolly old early Christian duffer," cried Rupert, in a sort\par
of rapture, "I don't wonder you couldn't be a judge.  You think\par
every one as good as yourself.  Isn't the thing plain enough now?\par
A doubtful acquaintance; rowdy stories, a most suspicious conversation,\par
mean streets, a concealed knife, a man nearly killed, and, finally,\par
a false address.  That's what we call glaring goodness."\par
\par
"It's certainly very extraordinary," repeated Basil.\par
And he strolled moodily about the room.  Then he said:\par
"You are quite sure, constable, that there's no mistake?\par
You got the address right, and the police have really gone to it\par
and found it was a fraud?"\par
\par
"It was very simple, sir," said the policeman, chuckling.\par
"The place he named was a well-known common quite near London, and our\par
people were down there this morning before any of you were awake.\par
And there's no such house.  In fact, there are hardly any houses at all.\par
Though it is so near London, it's a blank moor with hardly five\par
trees on it, to say nothing of Christians.  Oh, no, sir, the address\par
was a fraud right enough.  He was a clever rascal, and chose one\par
of those scraps of lost England that people know nothing about.\par
Nobody could say off-hand that there was not a particular house\par
dropped somewhere about the heath.  But as a fact, there isn't."\par
\par
Basil's face during this sensible speech had been growing darker\par
and darker with a sort of desperate sagacity.  He was cornered almost\par
for the first time since I had known him; and to tell the truth I rather\par
wondered at the almost childish obstinacy which kept him so close to his\par
original prejudice in favour of the wildly questionable lieutenant.\par
At length he said:\par
\par
"You really searched the common?  And the address was really not\par
known in the district--by the way, what was the address?"\par
\par
The constable selected one of his slips of paper and consulted it,\par
but before he could speak Rupert Grant, who was leaning in the window\par
in a perfect posture of the quiet and triumphant detective,\par
struck in with the sharp and suave voice he loved so much to use.\par
\par
"Why, I can tell you that, Basil," he said graciously as he idly\par
plucked leaves from a plant in the window.  "I took the precaution\par
to get this man's address from the constable last night."\par
\par
"And what was it?" asked his brother gruffly.\par
\par
"The constable will correct me if I am wrong," said Rupert,\par
looking sweetly at the ceiling.  "It was:  The Elms, Buxton Common,\par
near Purley, Surrey."\par
\par
"Right, sir," said the policeman, laughing and folding up his papers.\par
\par
There was a silence, and the blue eyes of Basil looked blindly\par
for a few seconds into the void.  Then his head fell back\par
in his chair so suddenly that I started up, thinking him ill.\par
But before I could move further his lips had flown apart (I can use\par
no other phrase) and a peal of gigantic laughter struck and shook\par
the ceiling--laughter that shook the laughter, laughter redoubled,\par
laughter incurable, laughter that could not stop.\par
\par
Two whole minutes afterwards it was still unended; Basil was ill\par
with laughter; but still he laughed.  The rest of us were by this\par
time ill almost with terror.\par
\par
"Excuse me," said the insane creature, getting at last to his feet.\par
"I am awfully sorry.  It is horribly rude.  And stupid, too.\par
And also unpractical, because we have not much time to lose if we're\par
to get down to that place.  The train service is confoundedly bad,\par
as I happen to know.  It's quite out of proportion to the\par
comparatively small distance."\par
\par
"Get down to that place?"  I repeated blankly.  "Get down\par
to what place?"\par
\par
"I have forgotten its name," said Basil vaguely, putting his hands\par
in his pockets as he rose.  "Something Common near Purley.\par
Has any one got a timetable?"\par
\par
"You don't seriously mean," cried Rupert, who had been staring\par
in a sort of confusion of emotions.  "You don't mean that you want\par
to go to Buxton Common, do you?  You can't mean that!"\par
\par
"Why shouldn't I go to Buxton Common?" asked Basil, smiling.\par
\par
"Why should you?" said his brother, catching hold again restlessly\par
of the plant in the window and staring at the speaker.\par
\par
"To find our friend, the lieutenant, of course," said Basil Grant.\par
"I thought you wanted to find him?"\par
\par
Rupert broke a branch brutally from the plant and flung it\par
impatiently on the floor.  "And in order to find him," he said,\par
"you suggest the admirable expedient of going to the only place\par
on the habitable earth where we know he can't be."\par
\par
The constable and I could not avoid breaking into a kind of\par
assenting laugh, and Rupert, who had family eloquence, was encouraged\par
to go on with a reiterated gesture:\par
\par
"He may be in Buckingham Palace; he may be sitting astride the cross\par
of St Paul's; he may be in jail (which I think most likely);\par
he may be in the Great Wheel; he may be in my pantry; he may be\par
in your store cupboard; but out of all the innumerable points\par
of space, there is only one where he has just been systematically\par
looked for and where we know that he is not to be found--and that,\par
if I understand you rightly, is where you want us to go."\par
\par
"Exactly," said Basil calmly, getting into his great-coat;\par
"I thought you might care to accompany me.  If not, of course,\par
make yourselves jolly here till I come back."\par
\par
It is our nature always to follow vanishing things and value them\par
if they really show a resolution to depart.  We all followed Basil,\par
and I cannot say why, except that he was a vanishing thing,\par
that he vanished decisively with his great-coat and his stick.\par
Rupert ran after him with a considerable flurry of rationality.\par
\par
"My dear chap," he cried, "do you really mean that you see any good\par
in going down to this ridiculous scrub, where there is nothing\par
but beaten tracks and a few twisted trees, simply because it\par
was the first place that came into a rowdy lieutenant's head\par
when he wanted to give a lying reference in a scrape?"\par
\par
"Yes," said Basil, taking out his watch, "and, what's worse,\par
we've lost the train."\par
\par
He paused a moment and then added:  "As a matter of fact,\par
I think we may just as well go down later in the day.\par
I have some writing to do, and I think you told me, Rupert, that you\par
thought of going to the Dulwich Gallery.  I was rather too impetuous.\par
Very likely he wouldn't be in.  But if we get down by the 5.15,\par
which gets to Purley about 6, I expect we shall just catch him."\par
\par
"Catch him!" cried his brother, in a kind of final anger.\par
"I wish we could.  Where the deuce shall we catch him now?"\par
\par
"I keep forgetting the name of the common," said Basil, as he buttoned\par
up his coat.  "The Elms--what is it?  Buxton Common, near Purley.\par
That's where we shall find him."\par
\par
"But there is no such place," groaned Rupert; but he followed\par
his brother downstairs.\par
\par
We all followed him.  We snatched our hats from the hat-stand\par
and our sticks from the umbrella-stand; and why we followed him we\par
did not and do not know.  But we always followed him, whatever was\par
the meaning of the fact, whatever was the nature of his mastery.\par
And the strange thing was that we followed him the more completely\par
the more nonsensical appeared the thing which he said.  At bottom,\par
I believe, if he had risen from our breakfast table and said:\par
"I am going to find the Holy Pig with Ten Tails," we should have\par
followed him to the end of the world.\par
\par
I don't know whether this mystical feeling of mine about Basil\par
on this occasion has got any of the dark and cloudy colour,\par
so to speak, of the strange journey that we made the same evening.\par
It was already very dense twilight when we struck southward from Purley.\par
Suburbs and things on the London border may be, in most cases,\par
commonplace and comfortable.  But if ever by any chance they really\par
are empty solitudes they are to the human spirit more desolate\par
and dehumanized than any Yorkshire moors or Highland hills,\par
because the suddenness with which the traveller drops into that\par
silence has something about it as of evil elf-land. It seems to be\par
one of the ragged suburbs of the cosmos half-forgotten by God--\par
such a place was Buxton Common, near Purley.\par
\par
There was certainly a sort of grey futility in the landscape itself.\par
But it was enormously increased by the sense of grey futility\par
in our expedition.  The tracts of grey turf looked useless,\par
the occasional wind-stricken trees looked useless, but we,\par
the human beings, more useless than the hopeless turf or the idle trees.\par
We were maniacs akin to the foolish landscape, for we were come to chase\par
the wild goose which has led men and left men in bogs from the beginning.\par
We were three dazed men under the captaincy of a madman going to look\par
for a man whom we knew was not there in a house that had no existence.\par
A livid sunset seemed to look at us with a sort of sickly smile\par
before it died.\par
\par
Basil went on in front with his coat collar turned up, looking in\par
the gloom rather like a grotesque Napoleon.  We crossed swell after\par
swell of the windy common in increasing darkness and entire silence.\par
Suddenly Basil stopped and turned to us, his hands in his pockets.\par
Through the dusk I could just detect that he wore a broad grin\par
as of comfortable success.\par
\par
"Well," he cried, taking his heavily gloved hands out of his pockets\par
and slapping them together, "here we are at last."\par
\par
The wind swirled sadly over the homeless heath; two desolate\par
elms rocked above us in the sky like shapeless clouds of grey.\par
There was not a sign of man or beast to the sullen circle of the horizon,\par
and in the midst of that wilderness Basil Grant stood rubbing his\par
hands with the air of an innkeeper standing at an open door.\par
\par
"How jolly it is," he cried, "to get back to civilization.\par
That notion that civilization isn't poetical is a civilised delusion.\par
Wait till you've really lost yourself in nature, among the devilish\par
woodlands and the cruel flowers.  Then you'll know that there's\par
no star like the red star of man that he lights on his hearthstone;\par
no river like the red river of man, the good red wine, which you,\par
Mr Rupert Grant, if I have any knowledge of you, will be drinking\par
in two or three minutes in enormous quantities."\par
\par
Rupert and I exchanged glances of fear.  Basil went on heartily,\par
as the wind died in the dreary trees.\par
\par
"You'll find our host a much more simple kind of fellow in his own house.\par
I did when I visited him when he lived in the cabin at Yarmouth, and again\par
in the loft at the city warehouse.  He's really a very good fellow.\par
But his greatest virtue remains what I said originally."\par
\par
"What do you mean?"  I asked, finding his speech straying towards\par
a sort of sanity.  "What is his greatest virtue?"\par
\par
"His greatest virtue," replied Basil, "is that he always tells\par
the literal truth."\par
\par
"Well, really," cried Rupert, stamping about between cold and anger,\par
and slapping himself like a cabman, "he doesn't seem to have been\par
very literal or truthful in this case, nor you either.  Why the deuce,\par
may I ask, have you brought us out to this infernal place?"\par
\par
"He was too truthful, I confess," said Basil, leaning against the tree;\par
"too hardly veracious, too severely accurate.  He should have\par
indulged in a little more suggestiveness and legitimate romance.\par
But come, it's time we went in.  We shall be late for dinner."\par
\par
Rupert whispered to me with a white face:\par
\par
"Is it a hallucination, do you think?  Does he really fancy\par
he sees a house?"\par
\par
"I suppose so," I said.  Then I added aloud, in what was meant\par
to be a cheery and sensible voice, but which sounded in my ears\par
almost as strange as the wind:\par
\par
"Come, come, Basil, my dear fellow.  Where do you want us to go?"\par
\par
"Why, up here," cried Basil, and with a bound and a swing he was\par
above our heads, swarming up the grey column of the colossal tree.\par
\par
"Come up, all of you," he shouted out of the darkness, with the voice\par
of a schoolboy.  "Come up.  You'll be late for dinner."\par
\par
The two great elms stood so close together that there was scarcely\par
a yard anywhere, and in some places not more than a foot, between them.\par
Thus occasional branches and even bosses and boles formed a series\par
of footholds that almost amounted to a rude natural ladder.\par
They must, I supposed, have been some sport of growth,\par
Siamese twins of vegetation.\par
\par
Why we did it I cannot think; perhaps, as I have said, the mystery\par
of the waste and dark had brought out and made primary something\par
wholly mystical in Basil's supremacy.  But we only felt that there\par
was a giant's staircase going somewhere, perhaps to the stars;\par
and the victorious voice above called to us out of heaven.\par
We hoisted ourselves up after him.\par
\par
Half-way up some cold tongue of the night air struck and sobered\par
me suddenly.  The hypnotism of the madman above fell from me, and I saw\par
the whole map of our silly actions as clearly as if it were printed.\par
I saw three modern men in black coats who had begun with a perfectly\par
sensible suspicion of a doubtful adventurer and who had ended,\par
God knows how, half-way up a naked tree on a naked moorland, far from\par
that adventurer and all his works, that adventurer who was at that moment,\par
in all probability, laughing at us in some dirty Soho restaurant.\par
He had plenty to laugh at us about, and no doubt he was laughing\par
his loudest; but when I thought what his laughter would be if he knew\par
where we were at that moment, I nearly let go of the tree and fell.\par
\par
"Swinburne," said Rupert suddenly, from above, "what are we doing?\par
Let's get down again," and by the mere sound of his voice I knew\par
that he too felt the shock of wakening to reality.\par
\par
"We can't leave poor Basil," I said.  "Can't you call to him or get\par
hold of him by the leg?"\par
\par
"He's too far ahead," answered Rupert; "he's nearly at the top\par
of the beastly thing.  Looking for Lieutenant Keith in the rooks'\par
nests, I suppose."\par
\par
We were ourselves by this time far on our frantic vertical journey.\par
The mighty trunks were beginning to sway and shake slightly in the wind.\par
Then I looked down and saw something which made me feel that we\par
were far from the world in a sense and to a degree that I cannot\par
easily describe.  I saw that the almost straight lines of the tall\par
elm trees diminished a little in perspective as they fell.\par
I was used to seeing parallel lines taper towards the sky.\par
But to see them taper towards the earth made me feel lost in space,\par
like a falling star.\par
\par
"Can nothing be done to stop Basil?"  I called out.\par
\par
"No," answered my fellow climber.  "He's too far up.\par
He must get to the top, and when he finds nothing but wind and leaves\par
he may go sane again.  Hark at him above there; you can just hear\par
him talking to himself."\par
\par
"Perhaps he's talking to us," I said.\par
\par
"No," said Rupert, "he'd shout if he was.  I've never known him\par
to talk to himself before; I'm afraid he really is bad tonight;\par
it's a known sign of the brain going."\par
\par
"Yes," I said sadly, and listened.  Basil's voice certainly was\par
sounding above us, and not by any means in the rich and riotous\par
tones in which he had hailed us before.  He was speaking quietly,\par
and laughing every now and then, up there among the leaves and stars.\par
\par
After a silence mingled with this murmur, Rupert Grant suddenly said,\par
"My God!" with a violent voice.\par
\par
"What's the matter--are you hurt?"  I cried, alarmed.\par
\par
"No. Listen to Basil," said the other in a very strange voice.\par
"He's not talking to himself."\par
\par
"Then he is talking to us," I cried.\par
\par
"No," said Rupert simply, "he's talking to somebody else."\par
\par
Great branches of the elm loaded with leaves swung about us in a\par
sudden burst of wind, but when it died down I could still hear\par
the conversational voice above.  I could hear two voices.\par
\par
Suddenly from aloft came Basil's boisterous hailing voice as before:\par
"Come up, you fellows.  Here's Lieutenant Keith."\par
\par
And a second afterwards came the half-American voice we had heard\par
in our chambers more than once.  It called out:\par
\par
"Happy to see you, gentlemen; pray come in."\par
\par
Out of a hole in an enormous dark egg-shaped thing, pendent in the\par
branches like a wasps' nest, was protruding the pale face and fierce\par
moustache of the lieutenant, his teeth shining with that slightly\par
Southern air that belonged to him.\par
\par
Somehow or other, stunned and speechless, we lifted ourselves heavily\par
into the opening.  We fell into the full glow of a lamp-lit, cushioned,\par
tiny room, with a circular wall lined with books, a circular table,\par
and a circular seat around it.  At this table sat three people.\par
One was Basil, who, in the instant after alighting there,\par
had fallen into an attitude of marmoreal ease as if he had been\par
there from boyhood; he was smoking a cigar with a slow pleasure.\par
The second was Lieutenant Drummond Keith, who looked happy also,\par
but feverish and doubtful compared with his granite guest.\par
The third was the little bald-headed house-agent with the wild whiskers,\par
who called himself Montmorency.  The spears, the green umbrella,\par
and the cavalry sword hung in parallels on the wall.  The sealed\par
jar of strange wine was on the mantelpiece, the enormous rifle in\par
the corner.  In the middle of the table was a magnum of champagne.\par
Glasses were already set for us.\par
\par
The wind of the night roared far below us, like an ocean at the foot\par
of a light-house. The room stirred slightly, as a cabin might\par
in a mild sea.\par
\par
Our glasses were filled, and we still sat there dazed and dumb.\par
Then Basil spoke.\par
\par
"You seem still a little doubtful, Rupert.  Surely there is no\par
further question about the cold veracity of our injured host."\par
\par
"I don't quite grasp it all," said Rupert, blinking still in\par
the sudden glare.  "Lieutenant Keith said his address was--"\par
\par
"It's really quite right, sir," said Keith, with an open smile.\par
"The bobby asked me where I lived.  And I said, quite truthfully,\par
that I lived in the elms on Buxton Common, near Purley.  So I do.\par
This gentleman, Mr Montmorency, whom I think you have met before,\par
is an agent for houses of this kind.  He has a special line\par
in arboreal villas.  It's being kept rather quiet at present,\par
because the people who want these houses don't want them to get\par
too common.  But it's just the sort of thing a fellow like myself,\par
racketing about in all sorts of queer corners of London,\par
naturally knocks up against."\par
\par
"Are you really an agent for arboreal villas?" asked Rupert eagerly,\par
recovering his ease with the romance of reality.\par
\par
Mr Montmorency, in his embarrassment, fingered one of his pockets\par
and nervously pulled out a snake, which crawled about the table.\par
\par
"W-well, yes, sir," he said.  "The fact was--er--my people\par
wanted me very much to go into the house-agency business.\par
But I never cared myself for anything but natural history\par
and botany and things like that.  My poor parents have been dead\par
some years now, but--naturally I like to respect their wishes.\par
And I thought somehow that an arboreal villa agency was a sort of--\par
of compromise between being a botanist and being a house-agent."\par
\par
Rupert could not help laughing.  "Do you have much custom?" he asked.\par
\par
"N-not much," replied Mr Montmorency, and then he glanced at Keith,\par
who was (I am convinced) his only client.  "But what there is--\par
very select."\par
\par
"My dear friends," said Basil, puffing his cigar, "always remember\par
two facts.  The first is that though when you are guessing\par
about any one who is sane, the sanest thing is the most likely;\par
when you are guessing about any one who is, like our host,\par
insane, the maddest thing is the most likely.  The second is\par
to remember that very plain literal fact always seems fantastic.\par
If Keith had taken a little brick box of a house in Clapham with nothing\par
but railings in front of it and had written `The Elms' over it,\par
you wouldn't have thought there was anything fantastic about that.\par
Simply because it was a great blaring, swaggering lie you would\par
have believed it."\par
\par
"Drink your wine, gentlemen," said Keith, laughing, "for this\par
confounded wind will upset it."\par
\par
We drank, and as we did so, although the hanging house, by a\par
cunning mechanism, swung only slightly, we knew that the great head\par
of the elm tree swayed in the sky like a stricken thistle.\par
\par
\par
\par
Chapter 5\par
\par
The Noticeable Conduct of Professor Chadd\par
\par
\par
Basil Grant had comparatively few friends besides myself; yet he was\par
the reverse of an unsociable man.  He would talk to any one anywhere,\par
and talk not only well but with perfectly genuine concern and enthusiasm\par
for that person's affairs.  He went through the world, as it were,\par
as if he were always on the top of an omnibus or waiting for a train.\par
Most of these chance acquaintances, of course, vanished into darkness\par
out of his life.  A few here and there got hooked on to him,\par
so to speak, and became his lifelong intimates, but there was\par
an accidental look about all of them as if they were windfalls,\par
samples taken at random, goods fallen from a goods train\par
or presents fished out of a bran-pie. One would be, let us say,\par
a veterinary surgeon with the appearance of a jockey; another, a mild\par
prebendary with a white beard and vague views; another, a young\par
captain in the Lancers, seemingly exactly like other captains\par
in the Lancers; another, a small dentist from Fulham, in all\par
reasonable certainty precisely like every other dentist from Fulham.\par
Major Brown, small, dry, and dapper, was one of these; Basil had\par
made his acquaintance over a discussion in a hotel cloak-room about\par
the right hat, a discussion which reduced the little major almost\par
to a kind of masculine hysterics, the compound of the selfishness\par
of an old bachelor and the scrupulosity of an old maid.\par
They had gone home in a cab together and then dined with each\par
other twice a week until they died.  I myself was another.\par
I had met Grant while he was still a judge, on the balcony of the\par
National Liberal Club, and exchanged a few words about the weather.\par
Then we had talked for about an hour about politics and God;\par
for men always talk about the most important things to total strangers.\par
It is because in the total stranger we perceive man himself;\par
the image of God is not disguised by resemblances to an uncle\par
or doubts of the wisdom of a moustache.\par
\par
One of the most interesting of Basil's motley group of acquaintances\par
was Professor Chadd.  He was known to the ethnological world\par
(which is a very interesting world, but a long way off this one)\par
as the second greatest, if not the greatest, authority on the relations\par
of savages to language.  He was known to the neighbourhood\par
of Hart Street, Bloomsbury, as a bearded man with a bald head,\par
spectacles, and a patient face, the face of an unaccountable\par
Nonconformist who had forgotten how to be angry.  He went to and fro\par
between the British Museum and a selection of blameless tea-shops,\par
with an armful of books and a poor but honest umbrella.\par
He was never seen without the books and the umbrella, and was supposed\par
(by the lighter wits of the Persian MS.  room) to go to bed with them\par
in his little brick villa in the neighbourhood of Shepherd's Bush.\par
There he lived with three sisters, ladies of solid goodness,\par
but sinister demeanour.  His life was happy, as are almost all the lives\par
of methodical students, but one would not have called it exhilarating.\par
His only hours of exhilaration occurred when his friend, Basil Grant,\par
came into the house, late at night, a tornado of conversation.\par
\par
Basil, though close on sixty, had moods of boisterous babyishness,\par
and these seemed for some reason or other to descend upon him\par
particularly in the house of his studious and almost dingy friend.\par
I can remember vividly (for I was acquainted with both parties\par
and often dined with them) the gaiety of Grant on that particular\par
evening when the strange calamity fell upon the professor.\par
Professor Chadd was, like most of his particular class and type\par
(the class that is at once academic and middle-class), a Radical\par
of a solemn and old-fashioned type.  Grant was a Radical himself,\par
but he was that more discriminating and not uncommon type of\par
Radical who passes most of his time in abusing the Radical party.\par
Chadd had just contributed to a magazine an article called\par
"Zulu Interests and the New Makango Frontier', in which a precise\par
scientific report of his study of the customs of the people\par
of T'Chaka was reinforced by a severe protest against certain\par
interferences with these customs both by the British and the Germans.\par
He-was sitting with the magazine in front of him, the lamplight\par
shining on his spectacles, a wrinkle in his forehead, not of anger,\par
but of perplexity, as Basil Grant strode up and down the room,\par
shaking it with his voice, with his high spirits and his heavy tread.\par
\par
"It's not your opinions that I object to, my esteemed Chadd,"\par
he was saying, "it's you.  You are quite right to champion\par
the Zulus, but for all that you do not sympathize with them.\par
No doubt you know the Zulu way of cooking tomatoes and the Zulu prayer\par
before blowing one's nose; but for all that you don't understand\par
them as well as I do, who don't know an assegai from an alligator.\par
You are more learned, Chadd, but I am more Zulu.  Why is it that the jolly\par
old barbarians of this earth are always championed by people who are\par
their antithesis?  Why is it?  You are sagacious, you are benevolent,\par
you are well informed, but, Chadd, you are not savage.  Live no longer\par
under that rosy illusion.  Look in the glass.  Ask your sisters.\par
Consult the librarian of the British Museum.  Look at this umbrella."\par
And he held up that sad but still respectable article.  "Look at it.\par
For ten mortal years to my certain knowledge you have carried\par
that object under your arm, and I have no sort of doubt that you\par
carried it at the age of eight months, and it never occurred to you\par
to give one wild yell and hurl it like a javelin--thus--"\par
\par
And he sent the umbrella whizzing past the professor's bald head,\par
so that it knocked over a pile of books with a crash and left\par
a vase rocking.\par
\par
Professor Chadd appeared totally unmoved, with his face still lifted\par
to the lamp and the wrinkle cut in his forehead.\par
\par
"Your mental processes," he said, "always go a little too fast.\par
And they are stated without method.  There is no kind of inconsistency"--\par
and no words can convey the time he took to get to the end of\par
the word--"between valuing the right of the aborigines to adhere\par
to their stage in the evolutionary process, so long as they find it\par
congenial and requisite to do so.  There is, I say, no inconsistency\par
between this concession which I have just described to you and the view\par
that the evolutionary stage in question is, nevertheless, so far as we\par
can form any estimate of values in the variety of cosmic processes,\par
definable in some degree as an inferior evolutionary stage."\par
\par
Nothing but his lips had moved as he spoke, and his glasses still\par
shone like two pallid moons.\par
\par
Grant was shaking with laughter as he watched him.\par
\par
"True," he said, "there is no inconsistency, my son of the red spear.\par
But there is a great deal of incompatibility of temper.\par
I am very far from being certain that the Zulu is on an inferior\par
evolutionary stage, whatever the blazes that may mean.  I do not think\par
there is anything stupid or ignorant about howling at the moon or being\par
afraid of devils in the dark.  It seems to me perfectly philosophical.\par
Why should a man be thought a sort of idiot because he feels\par
the mystery and peril of existence itself?  Suppose, my dear Chadd,\par
suppose it is we who are the idiots because we are not afraid\par
of devils in the dark?"\par
\par
Professor Chadd slit open a page of the magazine with a bone\par
paper-knife and the intent reverence of the bibliophile.\par
\par
"Beyond all question," he said, "it is a tenable hypothesis.\par
I allude to the hypothesis which I understand you to entertain,\par
that our civilization is not or may not be an advance upon,\par
and indeed (if I apprehend you), is or may be a retrogression\par
from states identical with or analogous to the state of the Zulus.\par
Moreover, I shall be inclined to concede that such a proposition\par
is of the nature, in some degree at least, of a primary proposition,\par
and cannot adequately be argued, in the same sense, I mean,\par
that the primary proposition of pessimism, or the primary proposition\par
of the non-existence of matter, cannot adequately be argued.\par
But I do not conceive you to be under the impression that you\par
have demonstrated anything more concerning this proposition than\par
that it is tenable, which, after all, amounts to little more than\par
the statement that it is not a contradiction in terms."\par
\par
Basil threw a book at his head and took out a cigar.\par
\par
"You don't understand," he said, "but, on the other hand,\par
as a compensation, you don't mind smoking.  Why you don't object\par
to that disgustingly barbaric rite I can't think.  I can only say\par
that I began it when I began to be a Zulu, about the age of ten.\par
What I maintained was that although you knew more about Zulus in the sense\par
that you are a scientist, I know more about them in the sense that I\par
am a savage.  For instance, your theory of the origin of language,\par
something about its having come from the formulated secret language\par
of some individual creature, though you knocked me silly with\par
facts and scholarship in its favour, still does not convince me,\par
because I have a feeling that that is not the way that things happen.\par
If you ask me why I think so I can only answer that I am a Zulu;\par
and if you ask me (as you most certainly will) what is my definition\par
of a Zulu, I can answer that also.  He is one who has climbed a Sussex\par
apple-tree at seven and been afraid of a ghost in an English lane."\par
\par
"Your process of thought--" began the immovable Chadd, but his speech\par
was interrupted.  His sister, with that masculinity which always\par
in such families concentrates in sisters, flung open the door\par
with a rigid arm and said:\par
\par
"James, Mr Bingham of the British Museum wants to see you again."\par
\par
The philosopher rose with a dazed look, which always indicates\par
in such men the fact that they regard philosophy as a familiar thing,\par
but practical life as a weird and unnerving vision, and walked\par
dubiously out of the room.\par
\par
"I hope you do not mind my being aware of it, Miss Chadd,"\par
said Basil Grant, "but I hear that the British Museum has recognized\par
one of the men who have deserved well of their commonwealth.\par
It is true, is it not, that Professor Chadd is likely to be made\par
keeper of Asiatic manuscripts?"\par
\par
The grim face of the spinster betrayed a great deal of pleasure\par
and a great deal of pathos also.  "I believe it's true," she said.\par
"If it is, it will not only be great glory which women, I assure you,\par
feel a great deal, but great relief, which they feel more;\par
relief from worry from a lot of things.  James' health has never\par
been good, and while we are as poor as we are he had to do journalism\par
and coaching, in addition to his own dreadful grinding notions\par
and discoveries, which he loves more than man, woman, or child.\par
I have often been afraid that unless something of this kind\par
occurred we should really have to be careful of his brain.\par
But I believe it is practically settled."\par
\par
"I am delighted," began Basil, but with a worried face, "but these\par
red-tape negotiations are so terribly chancy that I really can't\par
advise you to build on hope, only to be hurled down into bitterness.\par
I've known men, and good men like your brother, come nearer than\par
this and be disappointed.  Of course, if it is true--"\par
\par
"If it is true," said the woman fiercely, "it means that people\par
who have never lived may make an attempt at living."\par
\par
Even as she spoke the professor came into the room still with the dazed\par
look in his eyes.\par
\par
"Is it true?" asked Basil, with burning eyes.\par
\par
"Not a bit true," answered Chadd after a moment's bewilderment.\par
"Your argument was in three points fallacious."\par
\par
"What do you mean?" demanded Grant.\par
\par
"Well," said the professor slowly, "in saying that you could possess\par
a knowledge of the essence of Zulu life distinct from--"\par
\par
"Oh! confound Zulu life," cried Grant, with a burst of laughter.\par
"I mean, have you got the post?"\par
\par
"You mean the post of keeper of the Asiatic manuscripts," he said,\par
opening his eye with childlike wonder.  "Oh, yes, I got that.\par
But the real objection to your argument, which has only, I admit,\par
occurred to me since I have been out of the room, is that it does\par
not merely presuppose a Zulu truth apart from the facts, but infers\par
that the discovery of it is absolutely impeded by the facts."\par
\par
"I am crushed," said Basil, and sat down to laugh, while the professor's\par
sister retired to her room, possibly, possibly not.\par
\par
It was extremely late when we left the Chadds, and it is an extremely\par
long and tiresome journey from Shepherd's Bush to Lambeth.\par
This may be our excuse for the fact that we (for I was stopping\par
the night with Grant) got down to breakfast next day at a time\par
inexpressibly criminal, a time, in point of fact, close upon noon.\par
Even to that belated meal we came in a very lounging and\par
leisurely fashion.  Grant, in particular, seemed so dreamy at table\par
that he scarcely saw the pile of letters by his plate, and I doubt\par
if he would have opened any of them if there had not lain on the top\par
that one thing which has succeeded amid modern carelessness in being\par
really urgent and coercive--a telegram.  This he opened with the same\par
heavy distraction with which he broke his egg and drank his tea.\par
When he read it he did not stir a hair or say a word, but something,\par
I know not what, made me feel that the motionless figure had been\par
pulled together suddenly as strings are tightened on a slack guitar.\par
Though he said nothing and did not move, I knew that he had been\par
for an instant cleared and sharpened with a shock of cold water.\par
It was scarcely any surprise to me when a man who had drifted\par
sullenly to his seat and fallen into it, kicked it away like a cur\par
from under him and came round to me in two strides.\par
\par
"What do you make of that?" he said, and flattened out the wire\par
in front of me.\par
\par
It ran:  "Please come at once.  James' mental state dangerous.  Chadd."\par
\par
"What does the woman mean?"  I said after a pause, irritably.\par
"Those women have been saying that the poor old professor was mad\par
ever since he was born."\par
\par
"You are mistaken," said Grant composedly.  "It is true that all\par
sensible women think all studious men mad.  It is true, for the matter\par
of that, all women of any kind think all men of any kind mad.\par
But they don't put it in telegrams, any more than they wire to you\par
that grass is green or God all-merciful. These things are truisms,\par
and often private ones at that.  If Miss Chadd has written down under\par
the eye of a strange woman in a post-office that her brother is off\par
his head you may be perfectly certain that she did it because it\par
was a matter of life and death, and she can think of no other way\par
of forcing us to come promptly."\par
\par
"It will force us of course," I said, smiling.\par
\par
"Oh, yes," he replied; "there is a cab-rank near."\par
\par
Basil scarcely said a word as we drove across Westminster Bridge,\par
through Trafalgar Square, along Piccadilly, and up the Uxbridge Road.\par
Only as he was opening the gate he spoke.\par
\par
"I think you will take my word for it, my friend," he said;\par
"this is one of the most queer and complicated and astounding\par
incidents that ever happened in London or, for that matter,\par
in any high civilization."\par
\par
"I confess with the greatest sympathy and reverence that I don't quite\par
see it," I said.  "Is it so very extraordinary or complicated that a\par
dreamy somnambulant old invalid who has always walked on the borders\par
of the inconceivable should go mad under the shock of great joy?\par
Is it so very extraordinary that a man with a head like a turnip\par
and a soul like a spider's web should not find his strength equal\par
to a confounding change of fortunes?  Is it, in short, so very\par
extraordinary that James Chadd should lose his wits from excitement?"\par
\par
"It would not be extraordinary in the least," answered Basil,\par
with placidity.  "It would not be extraordinary in the least,"\par
he repeated, "if the professor had gone mad.  That was not\par
the extraordinary circumstance to which I referred."\par
\par
"What," I asked, stamping my foot, "was the extraordinary thing?"\par
\par
"The extraordinary thing," said Basil, ringing the bell, "is that\par
he has not gone mad from excitement."\par
\par
The tall and angular figure of the eldest Miss Chadd blocked the doorway\par
as the door opened.  Two other Miss Chadds seemed in the same\par
way to be blocking the narrow passage and the little parlour.\par
There was a general sense of their keeping something from view.\par
They seemed like three black-clad ladies in some strange play\par
of Maeterlinck, veiling the catastrophe from the audience in the manner\par
of the Greek chorus.\par
\par
"Sit down, won't you?" said one of them, in a voice that was\par
somewhat rigid with pain.  "I think you had better be told first\par
what has happened."\par
\par
Then, with her bleak face looking unmeaningly out of the window,\par
she continued, in an even and mechanical voice:\par
\par
"I had better state everything that occurred just as it occurred.\par
This morning I was clearing away the breakfast things,\par
my sisters were both somewhat unwell, and had not come down.\par
My brother had just gone out of the room, I believe, to fetch a book.\par
He came back again, however, without it, and stood for some time\par
staring at the empty grate.  I said, `Were you looking for anything\par
I could get?'  He did not answer, but this constantly happens,\par
as he is often very abstracted.  I repeated my question,\par
and still he did not answer.  Sometimes he is so wrapped up in his\par
studies that nothing but a touch on the shoulder would make him\par
aware of one's presence, so I came round the table towards him.\par
I really do not know how to describe the sensation which I then had.\par
It seems simply silly, but at the moment it seemed something enormous,\par
upsetting one's brain.  The fact is, James was standing on one leg."\par
\par
Grant smiled slowly and rubbed his hands with a kind of care.\par
\par
"Standing on one leg?"  I repeated.\par
\par
"Yes," replied the dead voice of the woman without an inflection\par
to suggest that she felt the fantasticality of her statement.\par
"He was standing on the left leg and the right drawn up at a sharp angle,\par
the toe pointing downwards.  I asked him if his leg hurt him.\par
His only answer was to shoot the leg straight at right angles\par
to the other, as if pointing to the other with his toe to the wall.\par
He was still looking quite gravely at the fireplace.\par
\par
"`James, what is the matter?'  I cried, for I was thoroughly frightened.\par
James gave three kicks in the air with the right leg, flung up the other,\par
gave three kicks in the air with it also and spun round like a teetotum\par
the other way.  `Are you mad?'  I cried.  `Why don't you answer me?'\par
He had come to a standstill facing me, and was looking at me as\par
he always does, with his lifted eyebrows and great spectacled eyes.\par
When I had spoken he remained a second or two motionless, and then\par
his only reply was to lift his left foot slowly from the floor and\par
describe circles with it in the air.  I rushed to the door and shouted\par
for Christina.  I will not dwell on the dreadful hours that followed.\par
All three of us talked to him, implored him to speak to us with\par
appeals that might have brought back the dead, but he has done\par
nothing but hop and dance and kick with a solemn silent face.\par
It looks as if his legs belonged to some one else or were possessed\par
by devils.  He has never spoken to us from that time to this."\par
\par
"Where is he now?"  I said, getting up in some agitation.\par
"We ought not to leave him alone."\par
\par
"Doctor Colman is with him," said Miss Chadd calmly.  "They are\par
in the garden.  Doctor Colman thought the air would do him good.\par
And he can scarcely go into the street."\par
\par
Basil and I walked rapidly to the window which looked out on the garden.\par
It was a small and somewhat smug suburban garden; the flower beds\par
a little too neat and like the pattern of a coloured carpet;\par
but on this shining and opulent summer day even they had\par
the exuberance of something natural, I had almost said tropical.\par
In the middle of a bright and verdant but painfully circular lawn\par
stood two figures.  One of them was a small, sharp-looking man\par
with black whiskers and a very polished hat (I presume Dr Colman),\par
who was talking very quietly and clearly, yet with a nervous twitch,\par
as it were, in his face.  The other was our old friend,\par
listening with his old forbearing expression and owlish eyes,\par
the strong sunlight gleaming on his glasses as the lamplight had\par
gleamed the night before, when the boisterous Basil had rallied\par
him on his studious decorum.  But for one thing the figure of this\par
morning might have been the identical figure of last night.\par
That one thing was that while the face listened reposefully\par
the legs were industriously dancing like the legs of a marionette.\par
The neat flowers and the sunny glitter of the garden lent\par
an indescribable sharpness and incredibility to the prodigy--\par
the prodigy of the head of a hermit and the legs of a harlequin.\par
For miracles should always happen in broad daylight.\par
The night makes them credible and therefore commonplace.\par
\par
The second sister had by this time entered the room and came somewhat\par
drearily to the window.\par
\par
"You know, Adelaide," she said, "that Mr Bingham from the Museum\par
is coming again at three."\par
\par
"I know," said Adelaide Chadd bitterly.  "I suppose we shall have\par
to tell him about this.  I thought that no good fortune would ever\par
come easily to us."\par
\par
Grant suddenly turned round.  "What do you mean?" he said.\par
"What will you have to tell Mr Bingham?"\par
\par
"You know what I shall have to tell him," said the professor's sister,\par
almost fiercely.  "I don't know that we need give it its wretched name.\par
Do you think that the keeper of Asiatic manuscripts will be allowed\par
to go on like that?"  And she pointed for an instant at the figure\par
in the garden, the shining, listening face and the unresting feet.\par
\par
Basil Grant took out his watch with an abrupt movement.\par
"When did you say the British Museum man was coming?" he said.\par
\par
"Three o'clock," said Miss Chadd briefly.\par
\par
"Then I have an hour before me," said Grant, and without another word\par
threw up the window and jumped out into the garden.  He did not walk\par
straight up to the doctor and lunatic, but strolling round the garden\par
path drew near them cautiously and yet apparently carelessly.\par
He stood a couple of feet off them, seemingly counting halfpence\par
out of his trousers pocket, but, as I could see, looking up steadily\par
under the broad brim of his hat.\par
\par
Suddenly he stepped up to Professor Chadd's elbow, and said,\par
in a loud familiar voice, "Well, my boy, do you still think\par
the Zulus our inferiors?"\par
\par
The doctor knitted his brows and looked anxious, seeming to be about\par
to speak.  The professor turned his bald and placid head towards\par
Grant in a friendly manner, but made no answer, idly flinging his\par
left leg about.\par
\par
"Have you converted Dr Colman to your views?"  Basil continued,\par
still in the same loud and lucid tone.\par
\par
Chadd only shuffled his feet and kicked a little with the other leg,\par
his expression still benevolent and inquiring.  The doctor cut\par
in rather sharply.  "Shall we go inside, professor?" he said.\par
"Now you have shown me the garden.  A beautiful garden.\par
A most beautiful garden.  Let us go in," and he tried to draw\par
the kicking ethnologist by the elbow, at the same time whispering\par
to Grant:  "I must ask you not to trouble him with questions.\par
Most risky.  He must be soothed."\par
\par
Basil answered in the same tone, with great coolness:\par
\par
"Of course your directions must be followed out, doctor.  I will endeavour\par
to do so, but I hope it will not be inconsistent with them if you\par
will leave me alone with my poor friend in this garden for an hour.\par
I want to watch him.  I assure you, Dr Colman, that I shall say very\par
little to him, and that little shall be as soothing as--as syrup."\par
\par
The doctor wiped his eyeglass thoughtfully.\par
\par
"It is rather dangerous for him," he said, "to be long in the strong\par
sun without his hat.  With his bald head, too."\par
\par
"That is soon settled," said Basil composedly, and took off his own\par
big hat and clapped it on the egglike skull of the professor.\par
The latter did not turn round but danced away with his eyes\par
on the horizon.\par
\par
The doctor put on his glasses again, looked severely at the two\par
for some seconds, with his head on one side like a bird's,\par
and then saying, shortly, "All right," strutted away into the house,\par
where the three Misses Chadd were all looking out from the parlour\par
window on to the garden.  They looked out on it with hungry eyes\par
for a full hour without moving, and they saw a sight which was more\par
extraordinary than madness itself.\par
\par
Basil Grant addressed a few questions to the madman, without succeeding\par
in making him do anything but continue to caper, and when he had\par
done this slowly took a red note-book out of one pocket and a large\par
pencil out of another.\par
\par
He began hurriedly to scribble notes.  When the lunatic skipped away from\par
him he would walk a few yards in pursuit, stop, and make notes again.\par
Thus they followed each other round and round the foolish circle\par
of turf, the one writing in pencil with the face of a man working\par
out a problem, the other leaping and playing like a child.\par
\par
After about three-quarters of an hour of this imbecile scene,\par
Grant put the pencil in his pocket, but kept the note-book open\par
in his hand, and walking round the mad professor, planted himself\par
directly in front of him.\par
\par
Then occurred something that even those already used to that wild\par
morning had not anticipated or dreamed.  The professor, on finding\par
Basil in front of him, stared with a blank benignity for a few seconds,\par
and then drew up his left leg and hung it bent in the attitude\par
that his sister had described as being the first of all his antics.\par
And the moment he had done it Basil Grant lifted his own leg and held it\par
out rigid before him, confronting Chadd with the flat sole of his boot.\par
The professor dropped his bent leg, and swinging his weight on to it\par
kicked out the other behind, like a man swimming.  Basil crossed\par
his feet like a saltire cross, and then flung them apart again,\par
giving a leap into the air.  Then before any of the spectators\par
could say a word or even entertain a thought about the matter,\par
both of them were dancing a sort of jig or hornpipe opposite each other;\par
and the sun shone down on two madmen instead of one.\par
\par
They were so stricken with the deafness and blindness of monomania\par
that they did not see the eldest Miss Chadd come out feverishly into\par
the garden with gestures of entreaty, a gentleman following her.\par
Professor Chadd was in the wildest posture of a pas-de-quatre,\par
Basil Grant seemed about to turn a cart-wheel, when they were frozen\par
in their follies by the steely voice of Adelaide Chadd saying,\par
"Mr Bingham of the British Museum."\par
\par
Mr Bingham was a slim, well-clad gentleman with a pointed and\par
slightly effeminate grey beard, unimpeachable gloves, and formal\par
but agreeable manners.  He was the type of the over-civilized,\par
as Professor Chadd was of the uncivilized pedant.  His formality\par
and agreeableness did him some credit under the circumstances.\par
He had a vast experience of books and a considerable experience\par
of the more dilettante fashionable salons.  But neither branch\par
of knowledge had accustomed him to the spectacle of two grey-haired\par
middle-class gentlemen in modern costume throwing themselves about\par
like acrobats as a substitute for an after-dinner nap.\par
\par
The professor continued his antics with perfect placidity,\par
but Grant stopped abruptly.  The doctor had reappeared on the scene,\par
and his shiny black eyes, under his shiny black hat, moved restlessly\par
from one of them to the other.\par
\par
"Dr Colman," said Basil, turning to him, "will you entertain\par
Professor Chadd again for a little while?  I am sure that he needs you.\par
Mr Bingham, might I have the pleasure of a few moments'\par
private conversation?  My name is Grant."\par
\par
Mr Bingham, of the British Museum, bowed in a manner that was\par
respectful but a trifle bewildered.\par
\par
"Miss Chadd will excuse me," continued Basil easily, "if I know\par
my way about the house."  And he led the dazed librarian rapidly\par
through the back door into the parlour.\par
\par
"Mr Bingham," said Basil, setting a chair for him, "I imagine\par
that Miss Chadd has told you of this distressing occurrence."\par
\par
"She has, Mr Grant," said Bingham, looking at the table with a sort\par
of compassionate nervousness.  "I am more pained than I can say\par
by this dreadful calamity.  It seems quite heart-rending that\par
the thing should have happened just as we have decided to give\par
your eminent friend a position which falls far short of his merits.\par
As it is, of course--really, I don't know what to say.\par
Professor Chadd may, of course, retain--I sincerely trust he will--\par
his extraordinarily valuable intellect.  But I am afraid--\par
I am really afraid--that it would not do to have the curator\par
of the Asiatic manuscripts--er--dancing about."\par
\par
"I have a suggestion to make," said Basil, and sat down abruptly\par
in his chair, drawing it up to the table.\par
\par
"I am delighted, of course," said the gentleman from the British Museum,\par
coughing and drawing up his chair also.\par
\par
The clock on the mantelpiece ticked for just the moments required\par
for Basil to clear his throat and collect his words, and then he said:\par
\par
"My proposal is this.  I do not know that in the strict use of words\par
you could altogether call it a compromise, still it has something of\par
that character.  My proposal is that the Government (acting, as I presume,\par
through your Museum) should pay Professor Chadd L800 a year until\par
he stops dancing."\par
\par
"Eight hundred a year!" said Mr Bingham, and for the first time lifted\par
his mild blue eyes to those of his interlocutor--and he raised them\par
with a mild blue stare.  "I think I have not quite understood you.\par
Did I understand you to say that Professor Chadd ought to be employed,\par
in his present state, in the Asiatic manuscript department at eight\par
hundred a year?"\par
\par
Grant shook his head resolutely.\par
\par
"No," he said firmly.  "No. Chadd is a friend of mine,\par
and I would say anything for him I could.  But I do not say,\par
I cannot say, that he ought to take on the Asiatic manuscripts.\par
I do not go so far as that.  I merely say that until he stops\par
dancing you ought to pay him L800 Surely you have some general fund\par
for the endowment of research."\par
\par
Mr Bingham looked bewildered.\par
\par
"I really don't know," he said, blinking his eyes, "what you are\par
talking about.  Do you ask us to give this obvious lunatic nearly\par
a thousand a year for life?"\par
\par
"Not at all," cried Basil, keenly and triumphantly.  "I never said\par
for life.  Not at all."\par
\par
"What for, then?" asked the meek Bingham, suppressing an instinct\par
meekly to tear his hair.  "How long is this endowment to run?\par
Not till his death?  Till the Judgement day?"\par
\par
"No," said Basil, beaming, "but just what I said.  Till he has\par
stopped dancing."  And he lay back with satisfaction and his hands\par
in his pockets.\par
\par
Bingham had by this time fastened his eyes keenly on Basil Grant\par
and kept them there.\par
\par
"Come, Mr Grant," he said.  "Do I seriously understand you to suggest\par
that the Government pay Professor Chadd an extraordinarily high salary\par
simply on the ground that he has (pardon the phrase) gone mad?\par
That he should be paid more than four good clerks solely on the ground\par
that he is flinging his boots about in the back yard?"\par
\par
"Precisely," said Grant composedly.\par
\par
"That this absurd payment is not only to run on with the absurd dancing,\par
but actually to stop with the absurd dancing?"\par
\par
"One must stop somewhere," said Grant.  "Of course."\par
\par
Bingham rose and took up his perfect stick and gloves.\par
\par
"There is really nothing more to be said, Mr Grant," he said coldly.\par
"What you are trying to explain to me may be a joke--\par
a slightly unfeeling joke.  It may be your sincere view,\par
in which case I ask your pardon for the former suggestion.\par
But, in any case, it appears quite irrelevant to my duties.\par
The mental morbidity, the mental downfall, of Professor Chadd,\par
is a thing so painful to me that I cannot easily endure to speak\par
of it.  But it is clear there is a limit to everything.\par
And if the Archangel Gabriel went mad it would sever his connection,\par
I am sorry to say, with the British Museum Library."\par
\par
He was stepping towards the door, but Grant's hand, flung out\par
in dramatic warning, arrested him.\par
\par
"Stop!" said Basil sternly.  "Stop while there is yet time.\par
Do you want to take part in a great work, Mr Bingham?  Do you\par
want to help in the glory of Europe--in the glory of science?\par
Do you want to carry your head in the air when it is bald or\par
white because of the part that you bore in a great discovery?\par
Do you want--"\par
\par
Bingham cut in sharply:\par
\par
"And if I do want this, Mr Grant--"\par
\par
"Then," said Basil lightly, "your task is easy.  Get Chadd L800\par
a year till he stops dancing."\par
\par
With a fierce flap of his swinging gloves Bingham turned impatiently\par
to the door, but in passing out of it found it blocked.\par
Dr Colman was coming in.\par
\par
"Forgive me, gentlemen," he said, in a nervous, confidential voice,\par
"the fact is, Mr Grant, I--er--have made a most disturbing discovery\par
about Mr Chadd."\par
\par
Bingham looked at him with grave eyes.\par
\par
"I was afraid so," he said.  "Drink, I imagine."\par
\par
"Drink!" echoed Colman, as if that were a much milder affair.\par
"Oh, no, it's not drink."\par
\par
Mr Bingham became somewhat agitated, and his voice grew hurried\par
and vague.  "Homicidal mania--" he began.\par
\par
"No, no," said the medical man impatiently.\par
\par
"Thinks he's made of glass," said Bingham feverishly, "or says\par
he's God--or--"\par
\par
"No," said Dr Colman sharply; "the fact is, Mr Grant, my discovery\par
is of a different character.  The awful thing about him is--"\par
\par
"Oh, go on, sir," cried Bingham, in agony.\par
\par
"The awful thing about him is," repeated Colman, with deliberation,\par
"that he isn't mad."\par
\par
"Not mad!"\par
\par
"There are quite well-known physical tests of lunacy,"\par
said the doctor shortly; "he hasn't got any of them."\par
\par
"But why does he dance?" cried the despairing Bingham.\par
"Why doesn't he answer us?  Why hasn't he spoken to his family?"\par
\par
"The devil knows," said Dr Colman coolly.  "I'm paid to judge\par
of lunatics, but not of fools.  The man's not mad."\par
\par
"What on earth can it mean?  Can't we make him listen?" said Mr Bingham.\par
"Can none get into any kind of communication with him?"\par
\par
Grant's voice struck in sudden and clear, like a steel bell:\par
\par
"I shall be very happy," he said, "to give him any message you\par
like to send."\par
\par
Both men stared at him.\par
\par
"Give him a message?" they cried simultaneously.  "How will you\par
give him a message?"\par
\par
Basil smiled in his slow way.\par
\par
"If you really want to know how I shall give him your message,"\par
he began, but Bingham cried:\par
\par
"Of course, of course," with a sort of frenzy.\par
\par
"Well," said Basil, "like this."  And he suddenly sprang a foot\par
into the air, coming down with crashing boots, and then stood\par
on one leg.\par
\par
His face was stern, though this effect was slightly spoiled by the fact\par
that one of his feet was making wild circles in the air.\par
\par
"You drive me to it," he said.  "You drive me to betray my friend.\par
And I will, for his own sake, betray him."\par
\par
The sensitive face of Bingham took on an extra expression\par
of distress as of one anticipating some disgraceful disclosure.\par
"Anything painful, of course--" he began.\par
\par
Basil let his loose foot fall on the carpet with a crash that struck\par
them all rigid in their feeble attitudes.\par
\par
"Idiots!" he cried.  "Have you seen the man?  Have you looked\par
at James Chadd going dismally to and fro from his dingy house\par
to your miserable library, with his futile books and his confounded\par
umbrella, and never seen that he has the eyes of a fanatic?\par
Have you never noticed, stuck casually behind his spectacles\par
and above his seedy old collar, the face of a man who might\par
have burned heretics, or died for the philosopher's stone?\par
It is all my fault, in a way:  I lit the dynamite of his deadly faith.\par
I argued against him on the score of his famous theory about language--\par
the theory that language was complete in certain individuals and\par
was picked up by others simply by watching them.  I also chaffed\par
him about not understanding things in rough and ready practice.\par
What has this glorious bigot done?  He has answered me.  He has worked\par
out a system of language of his own (it would take too long to explain);\par
he has made up, I say, a language of his own.  And he has sworn that\par
till people understand it, till he can speak to us in this language,\par
he will not speak in any other.  And he shall not.  I have understood,\par
by taking careful notice; and, by heaven, so shall the others.\par
This shall not be blown upon.  He shall finish his experiment.\par
He shall have L800 a year from somewhere till he has stopped dancing.\par
To stop him now is an infamous war on a great idea.\par
It is religious persecution."\par
\par
Mr Bingham held out his hand cordially.\par
\par
"I thank you, Mr Grant," he said.  "I hope I shall be able\par
to answer for the source of the L800 and I fancy that I shall.\par
Will you come in my cab?"\par
\par
"No, thank you very much, Mr Bingham," said Grant heartily.\par
"I think I will go and have a chat with the professor in the garden."\par
\par
The conversation between Chadd and Grant appeared to be personal\par
and friendly.  They were still dancing when I left.\par
\par
\par
Chapter 6\par
\par
The Eccentric Seclusion of the Old Lady\par
\par
\par
The conversation of Rupert Grant had two great elements\par
of interest--first, the long fantasias of detective deduction\par
in which he was engaged, and, second, his genuine romantic\par
interest in the life of London.  His brother Basil said of him:\par
"His reasoning is particularly cold and clear, and invariably leads\par
him wrong.  But his poetry comes in abruptly and leads him right."\par
Whether this was true of Rupert as a whole, or no, it was certainly\par
curiously supported by one story about him which I think worth telling.\par
\par
We were walking along a lonely terrace in Brompton together.\par
The street was full of that bright blue twilight which comes\par
about half past eight in summer, and which seems for the moment\par
to be not so much a coming of darkness as the turning on of a new\par
azure illuminator, as if the earth were lit suddenly by a sapphire sun.\par
In the cool blue the lemon tint of the lamps had already begun\par
to flame, and as Rupert and I passed them, Rupert talking excitedly,\par
one after another the pale sparks sprang out of the dusk.\par
Rupert was talking excitedly because he was trying to prove to me\par
the nine hundred and ninety-ninth of his amateur detective theories.\par
He would go about London, with this mad logic in his brain,\par
seeing a conspiracy in a cab accident, and a special providence\par
in a falling fusee.  His suspicions at the moment were fixed upon\par
an unhappy milkman who walked in front of us.  So arresting were\par
the incidents which afterwards overtook us that I am really afraid that I\par
have forgotten what were the main outlines of the milkman's crime.\par
I think it had something to do with the fact that he had only one\par
small can of milk to carry, and that of that he had left the lid\par
loose and walked so quickly that he spilled milk on the pavement.\par
This showed that he was not thinking of his small burden, and this\par
again showed that he anticipated some other than lacteal business\par
at the end of his walk, and this (taken in conjunction with something\par
about muddy boots) showed something else that I have entirely forgotten.\par
I am afraid that I derided this detailed revelation unmercifully;\par
and I am afraid that Rupert Grant, who, though the best of fellows,\par
had a good deal of the sensitiveness of the artistic temperament,\par
slightly resented my derision.  He endeavoured to take a whiff of\par
his cigar, with the placidity which he associated with his profession,\par
but the cigar, I think, was nearly bitten through.\par
\par
"My dear fellow," he said acidly, "I'll bet you half a crown\par
that wherever that milkman comes to a real stop I'll find\par
out something curious."\par
\par
"My resources are equal to that risk," I said, laughing.  "Done."\par
\par
We walked on for about a quarter of an hour in silence in the trail\par
of the mysterious milkman.  He walked quicker and quicker, and we\par
had some ado to keep up with him; and every now and then he left\par
a splash of milk, silver in the lamplight.  Suddenly, almost before\par
we could note it, he disappeared down the area steps of a house.\par
I believe Rupert really believed that the milkman was a fairy;\par
for a second he seemed to accept him as having vanished.\par
Then calling something to me which somehow took no hold on my mind,\par
he darted after the mystic milkman, and disappeared himself\par
into the area.\par
\par
I waited for at least five minutes, leaning against a lamp-post\par
in the lonely street.  Then the milkman came swinging up the steps\par
without his can and hurried off clattering down the road.\par
Two or three minutes more elapsed, and then Rupert came bounding\par
up also, his face pale but yet laughing; a not uncommon contradiction\par
in him, denoting excitement.\par
\par
"My friend," he said, rubbing his hands, "so much for all\par
your scepticism.  So much for your philistine ignorance\par
of the possibilities of a romantic city.  Two and sixpence,\par
my boy, is the form in which your prosaic good nature will have\par
to express itself."\par
\par
"What?"  I said incredulously, "do you mean to say that you really\par
did find anything the matter with the poor milkman?"\par
\par
His face fell.\par
\par
"Oh, the milkman," he said, with a miserable affectation at having\par
misunderstood me.  "No, I--I didn't exactly bring anything home\par
to the milkman himself, I--"\par
\par
"What did the milkman say and do?"  I said, with inexorable sternness.\par
\par
"Well, to tell the truth," said Rupert, shifting restlessly from one\par
foot to another, "the milkman himself, as far as merely physical\par
appearances went, just said, `Milk, Miss,' and handed in the can.\par
That is not to say, of course, that he did not make some secret\par
sign or some--"\par
\par
I broke into a violent laugh.  "You idiot," I said,\par
"why don't you own yourself wrong and have done with it?\par
Why should he have made a secret sign any more than any one else?\par
You own he said nothing and did nothing worth mentioning.\par
You own that, don't you?"\par
\par
His face grew grave.\par
\par
"Well, since you ask me, I must admit that I do.  It is possible\par
that the milkman did not betray himself.  It is even possible that I\par
was wrong about him."\par
\par
"Then come along with you," I said, with a certain amicable anger,\par
"and remember that you owe me half a crown."\par
\par
"As to that, I differ from you," said Rupert coolly.  "The milkman's\par
remarks may have been quite innocent.  Even the milkman may have been.\par
But I do not owe you half a crown.  For the terms of the bet were,\par
I think, as follows, as I propounded them, that wherever that milkman\par
came to a real stop I should find out something curious."\par
\par
"Well?"  I said.\par
\par
"Well," he answered, "I jolly well have.  You just come with me,"\par
and before I could speak he had turned tail once more and whisked\par
through the blue dark into the moat or basement of the house.\par
I followed almost before I made any decision.\par
\par
When we got down into the area I felt indescribably foolish literally,\par
as the saying is, in a hole.  There was nothing but a closed door,\par
shuttered windows, the steps down which we had come, the ridiculous\par
well in which I found myself, and the ridiculous man who had\par
brought me there, and who stood there with dancing eyes.\par
I was just about to turn back when Rupert caught me by the elbow.\par
\par
"Just listen to that," he said, and keeping my coat gripped\par
in his right hand, he rapped with the knuckles of his left on\par
the shutters of the basement window.  His air was so definite\par
that I paused and even inclined my head for a moment towards it.\par
From inside was coming the murmur of an unmistakable human voice.\par
\par
"Have you been talking to somebody inside?"  I asked suddenly,\par
turning to Rupert.\par
\par
"No, I haven't," he replied, with a grim smile, "but I should very\par
much like to.  Do you know what somebody is saying in there?"\par
\par
"No, of course not," I replied.\par
\par
"Then I recommend you to listen," said Rupert sharply.\par
\par
In the dead silence of the aristocratic street at evening,\par
I stood a moment and listened.  From behind the wooden partition,\par
in which there was a long lean crack, was coming a continuous\par
and moaning sound which took the form of the words:  "When shall\par
I get out?  When shall I get out?  Will they ever let me out?"\par
or words to that effect.\par
\par
"Do you know anything about this?"  I said, turning upon\par
Rupert very abruptly.\par
\par
"Perhaps you think I am the criminal," he said sardonically,\par
"instead of being in some small sense the detective.\par
I came into this area two or three minutes ago, having told you\par
that I knew there was something funny going on, and this woman behind\par
the shutters (for it evidently is a woman) was moaning like mad.\par
No, my dear friend, beyond that I do not know anything about her.\par
She is not, startling as it may seem, my disinherited daughter,\par
or a member of my secret seraglio.  But when I hear a human being\par
wailing that she can't get out, and talking to herself like a mad\par
woman and beating on the shutters with her fists, as she was doing\par
two or three minutes ago, I think it worth mentioning, that is all."\par
\par
"My dear fellow," I said, "I apologize; this is no time for arguing.\par
What is to be done?"\par
\par
Rupert Grant had a long clasp-knife naked and brilliant in his hand.\par
\par
"First of all," he said, "house-breaking." And he forced the blade\par
into the crevice of the wood and broke away a huge splinter,\par
leaving a gap and glimpse of the dark window-pane inside.\par
The room within was entirely unlighted, so that for the first few seconds\par
the window seemed a dead and opaque surface, as dark as a strip of slate.\par
Then came a realization which, though in a sense gradual, made us\par
step back and catch our breath.  Two large dim human eyes were so\par
close to us that the window itself seemed suddenly to be a mask.\par
A pale human face was pressed against the glass within,\par
and with increased distinctness, with the increase of the opening\par
came the words:\par
\par
"When shall I get out?"\par
\par
"What can all this be?"  I said.\par
\par
Rupert made no answer, but lifting his walking-stick and pointing\par
the ferrule like a fencing sword at the glass, punched a hole in it,\par
smaller and more accurate than I should have supposed possible.\par
The moment he had done so the voice spouted out of the hole,\par
so to speak, piercing and querulous and clear, making the same\par
demand for liberty.\par
\par
"Can't you get out, madam?"  I said, drawing near the hole\par
in some perturbation.\par
\par
"Get out?  Of course I can't," moaned the unknown female bitterly.\par
"They won't let me.  I told them I would be let out.  I told them I'd\par
call the police.  But it's no good.  Nobody knows, nobody comes.\par
They could keep me as long as they liked only--"\par
\par
I was in the very act of breaking the window finally with my stick,\par
incensed with this very sinister mystery, when Rupert held my\par
arm hard, held it with a curious, still, and secret rigidity as if\par
he desired to stop me, but did not desire to be observed to do so.\par
I paused a moment, and in the act swung slightly round,\par
so that I was facing the supporting wall of the front door steps.\par
The act froze me into a sudden stillness like that of Rupert,\par
for a figure almost as motionless as the pillars of the portico,\par
but unmistakably human, had put his head out from between the\par
doorposts and was gazing down into the area.  One of the lighted\par
lamps of the street was just behind his head, throwing it into\par
abrupt darkness.  Consequently, nothing whatever could be seen\par
of his face beyond one fact, that he was unquestionably staring\par
at us.  I must say I thought Rupert's calmness magnificent.\par
He rang the area bell quite idly, and went on talking to me with\par
the easy end of a conversation which had never had any beginning.\par
The black glaring figure in the portico did not stir.\par
I almost thought it was really a statue.  In another moment the grey\par
area was golden with gaslight as the basement door was opened\par
suddenly and a small and decorous housemaid stood in it.\par
\par
"Pray excuse me," said Rupert, in a voice which he contrived to make\par
somehow or other at once affable and underbred, "but we thought\par
perhaps that you might do something for the Waifs and Strays.\par
We don't expect--"\par
\par
"Not here," said the small servant, with the incomparable severity\par
of the menial of the non-philanthropic, and slammed the door\par
in our faces.\par
\par
"Very sad, very sad--the indifference of these people," said the\par
philanthropist with gravity, as we went together up the steps.\par
As we did so the motionless figure in the portico suddenly disappeared.\par
\par
"Well, what do you make of that?" asked Rupert, slapping his gloves\par
together when we got into the street.\par
\par
I do not mind admitting that I was seriously upset.\par
Under such conditions I had but one thought.\par
\par
"Don't you think," I said a trifle timidly, "that we had better\par
tell your brother?"\par
\par
"Oh, if you like," said Rupert, in a lordly way.  "He is quite near,\par
as I promised to meet him at Gloucester Road Station.\par
Shall we take a cab?  Perhaps, as you say, it might amuse him."\par
\par
Gloucester Road Station had, as if by accident, a somewhat deserted look.\par
After a little looking about we discovered Basil Grant with his great\par
head and his great white hat blocking the ticket-office window.\par
I thought at first that he was taking a ticket for somewhere and\par
being an astonishingly long time about it.  As a matter of fact,\par
he was discussing religion with the booking-office clerk,\par
and had almost got his head through the hole in his excitement.\par
When we dragged him away it was some time before he would talk\par
of anything but the growth of an Oriental fatalism in modern thought,\par
which had been well typified by some of the official's ingenious\par
but perverse fallacies.  At last we managed to get him to understand\par
that we had made an astounding discovery.  When he did listen,\par
he listened attentively, walking between us up and down the lamp-lit\par
street, while we told him in a rather feverish duet of the great\par
house in South Kensington, of the equivocal milkman, of the lady\par
imprisoned in the basement, and the man staring from the porch.\par
At length he said:\par
\par
"If you're thinking of going back to look the thing up, you must\par
be careful what you do.  It's no good you two going there.\par
To go twice on the same pretext would look dubious.  To go on\par
a different pretext would look worse.  You may be quite certain\par
that the inquisitive gentleman who looked at you looked thoroughly,\par
and will wear, so to speak, your portraits next to his heart.\par
If you want to find out if there is anything in this without a police\par
raid I fancy you had better wait outside.  I'll go in and see them."\par
\par
His slow and reflective walk brought us at length within\par
sight of the house.  It stood up ponderous and purple against\par
the last pallor of twilight.  It looked like an ogre's castle.\par
And so apparently it was.\par
\par
"Do you think it's safe, Basil," said his brother, pausing,\par
a little pale, under the lamp, "to go into that place alone?\par
Of course we shall be near enough to hear if you yell,\par
but these devils might do something--something sudden--or odd.\par
I can't feel it's safe."\par
\par
"I know of nothing that is safe," said Basil composedly, "except,\par
possibly--death," and he went up the steps and rang at the bell.\par
When the massive respectable door opened for an instant, cutting a\par
square of gaslight in the gathering dark, and then closed with a bang,\par
burying our friend inside, we could not repress a shudder.\par
It had been like the heavy gaping and closing of the dim lips of some\par
evil leviathan.  A freshening night breeze began to blow up the street,\par
and we turned up the collars of our coats.  At the end of twenty minutes,\par
in which we had scarcely moved or spoken, we were as cold as icebergs,\par
but more, I think, from apprehension than the atmosphere.\par
Suddenly Rupert made an abrupt movement towards the house.\par
\par
"I can't stand this," he began, but almost as he spoke sprang back\par
into the shadow, for the panel of gold was again cut out of the black\par
house front, and the burly figure of Basil was silhouetted against\par
it coming out.  He was roaring with laughter and talking so loudly\par
that you could have heard every syllable across the street.\par
Another voice, or, possibly, two voices, were laughing and talking\par
back at him from within.\par
\par
"No, no, no," Basil was calling out, with a sort of hilarious hostility.\par
"That's quite wrong.  That's the most ghastly heresy of all.  It's the\par
soul, my dear chap, the soul that's the arbiter of cosmic forces.\par
When you see a cosmic force you don't like, trick it, my boy.\par
But I must really be off."\par
\par
"Come and pitch into us again," came the laughing voice from out\par
of the house.  "We still have some bones unbroken."\par
\par
"Thanks very much, I will--good night," shouted Grant, who had\par
by this time reached the street.\par
\par
"Good night," came the friendly call in reply, before the door closed.\par
\par
"Basil," said Rupert Grant, in a hoarse whisper, "what are we to do?"\par
\par
The elder brother looked thoughtfully from one of us to the other.\par
\par
"What is to be done, Basil?"  I repeated in uncontrollable excitement.\par
\par
"I'm not sure," said Basil doubtfully.  "What do you say to getting\par
some dinner somewhere and going to the Court Theatre tonight?\par
I tried to get those fellows to come, but they couldn't."\par
\par
We stared blankly.\par
\par
"Go to the Court Theatre?" repeated Rupert.  "What would be\par
the good of that?"\par
\par
"Good?  What do you mean?" answered Basil, staring also.\par
"Have you turned Puritan or Passive Resister, or something?\par
For fun, of course."\par
\par
"But, great God in Heaven!  What are we going to do, I mean!"\par
cried Rupert.  "What about the poor woman locked up in that house?\par
Shall I go for the police?"\par
\par
Basil's face cleared with immediate comprehension, and he laughed.\par
\par
"Oh, that," he said.  "I'd forgotten that.  That's all right.\par
Some mistake, possibly.  Or some quite trifling private affair.\par
But I'm sorry those fellows couldn't come with us.  Shall we take one\par
of these green omnibuses?  There is a restaurant in Sloane Square."\par
\par
"I sometimes think you play the fool to frighten us," I said irritably.\par
"How can we leave that woman locked up?  How can it be a mere\par
private affair?  How can crime and kidnapping and murder, for all I know,\par
be private affairs?  If you found a corpse in a man's drawing-room,\par
would you think it bad taste to talk about it just as if it was\par
a confounded dado or an infernal etching?"\par
\par
Basil laughed heartily.\par
\par
"That's very forcible," he said.  "As a matter of fact, though, I know\par
it's all right in this case.  And there comes the green omnibus."\par
\par
"How do you know it's all right in this ease?" persisted his\par
brother angrily.\par
\par
"My dear chap, the thing's obvious," answered Basil, holding a return\par
ticket between his teeth while he fumbled in his waistcoat pocket.\par
"Those two fellows never committed a crime in their lives.\par
They're not the kind.  Have either of you chaps got a halfpenny?\par
I want to get a paper before the omnibus comes."\par
\par
"Oh, curse the paper!" cried Rupert, in a fury.  "Do you mean to tell me,\par
Basil Grant, that you are going to leave a fellow creature in pitch\par
darkness in a private dungeon, because you've had ten minutes'\par
talk with the keepers of it and thought them rather good men?"\par
\par
"Good men do commit crimes sometimes," said Basil, taking the ticket\par
out of his mouth.  "But this kind of good man doesn't commit\par
that kind of crime.  Well, shall we get on this omnibus?"\par
\par
The great green vehicle was indeed plunging and lumbering along\par
the dim wide street towards us.  Basil had stepped from the curb,\par
and for an instant it was touch and go whether we should all have leaped\par
on to it and been borne away to the restaurant and the theatre.\par
\par
"Basil," I said, taking him firmly by the shoulder, "I simply won't\par
leave this street and this house."\par
\par
"Nor will I," said Rupert, glaring at it and biting his fingers.\par
"There's some black work going on there.  If I left it I should\par
never sleep again."\par
\par
Basil Grant looked at us both seriously.\par
\par
"Of course if you feel like that," he said, "we'll investigate further.\par
You'll find it's all right, though.  They're only two young\par
Oxford fellows.  Extremely nice, too, though rather infected with this\par
pseudo-Darwinian business.  Ethics of evolution and all that."\par
\par
"I think," said Rupert darkly, ringing the bell, "that we shall\par
enlighten you further about their ethics."\par
\par
"And may I ask," said Basil gloomily, "what it is that you\par
propose to do?"\par
\par
"I propose, first of all," said Rupert, "to get into this house;\par
secondly, to have a look at these nice young Oxford men; thirdly, to knock\par
them down, bind them, gag them, and search the house."\par
\par
Basil stared indignantly for a few minutes.  Then he was shaken\par
for an instant with one of his sudden laughs.\par
\par
"Poor little boys," he said.  "But it almost serves them right\par
for holding such silly views, after all," and he quaked again\par
with amusement "there's something confoundedly Darwinian about it."\par
\par
"I suppose you mean to help us?" said Rupert.\par
\par
"Oh, yes, I'll be in it," answered Basil, "if it's only to prevent\par
your doing the poor chaps any harm."\par
\par
He was standing in the rear of our little procession, looking indifferent\par
and sometimes even sulky, but somehow the instant the door opened\par
he stepped first into the hall, glowing with urbanity.\par
\par
"So sorry to haunt you like this," he said.  "I met two friends\par
outside who very much want to know you.  May I bring them in?"\par
\par
"Delighted, of course," said a young voice, the unmistakable voice\par
of the Isis, and I realized that the door had been opened, not by\par
the decorous little servant girl, but by one of our hosts in person.\par
He was a short, but shapely young gentleman, with curly dark hair\par
and a square, snub-nosed face.  He wore slippers and a sort of blazer\par
of some incredible college purple.\par
\par
"This way," he said; "mind the steps by the staircase.\par
This house is more crooked and old-fashioned than you would think\par
from its snobbish exterior.  There are quite a lot of odd corners\par
in the place really."\par
\par
"That," said Rupert, with a savage smile, "I can quite believe."\par
\par
We were by this time in the study or back parlour, used by\par
the young inhabitants as a sitting-room, an apartment littered\par
with magazines and books ranging from Dante to detective stories.\par
The other youth, who stood with his back to the fire smoking\par
a corncob, was big and burly, with dead brown hair brushed forward\par
and a Norfolk jacket.  He was that particular type of man whose\par
every feature and action is heavy and clumsy, and yet who is,\par
you would say, rather exceptionally a gentleman.\par
\par
"Any more arguments?" he said, when introductions had been effected.\par
"I must say, Mr Grant, you were rather severe upon eminent men\par
of science such as we.  I've half a mind to chuck my D.Sc. and\par
turn minor poet."\par
\par
"Bosh," answered Grant.  "I never said a word against eminent men\par
of science.  What I complain of is a vague popular philosophy\par
which supposes itself to be scientific when it is really nothing\par
but a sort of new religion and an uncommonly nasty one.\par
When people talked about the fall of man they knew they were\par
talking about a mystery, a thing they didn't understand.\par
Now that they talk about the survival of the fittest they think\par
they do understand it, whereas they have not merely no notion,\par
they have an elaborately false notion of what the words mean.\par
The Darwinian movement has made no difference to mankind,\par
except that, instead of talking unphilosophically about philosophy,\par
they now talk unscientifically about science."\par
\par
"That is all very well," said the big young man, whose name appeared\par
to be Burrows.  "Of course, in a sense, science, like mathematics\par
or the violin, can only be perfectly understood by specialists.\par
Still, the rudiments may be of public use.  Greenwood here,"\par
indicating the little man in the blazer, "doesn't know one note\par
of music from another.  Still, he knows something.  He knows enough\par
to take off his hat when they play `God save the King'.  He doesn't\par
take it off by mistake when they play `Oh, dem Golden Slippers'.\par
Just in the same way science--"\par
\par
Here Mr Burrows stopped abruptly.  He was interrupted by an argument\par
uncommon in philosophical controversy and perhaps not wholly legitimate.\par
Rupert Grant had bounded on him from behind, flung an arm round\par
his throat, and bent the giant backwards.\par
\par
"Knock the other fellow down, Swinburne," he called out, and before I knew\par
where I was I was locked in a grapple with the man in the purple blazer.\par
He was a wiry fighter, who bent and sprang like a whalebone,\par
but I was heavier and had taken him utterly by surprise.\par
I twitched one of his feet from under him; he swung for a moment\par
on the single foot, and then we fell with a crash amid the litter\par
of newspapers, myself on top.\par
\par
My attention for a moment released by victory, I could hear\par
Basil's voice finishing some long sentence of which I had not\par
heard the beginning.\par
\par
"... wholly, I must confess, unintelligible to me, my dear sir,\par
and I need not say unpleasant.  Still one must side with\par
one's old friends against the most fascinating new ones.\par
Permit me, therefore, in tying you up in this antimacassar,\par
to make it as commodious as handcuffs can reasonably be while..."\par
\par
I had staggered to my feet.  The gigantic Burrows was toiling in the\par
garotte of Rupert, while Basil was striving to master his mighty hands.\par
Rupert and Basil were both particularly strong, but so was Mr Burrows;\par
how strong, we knew a second afterwards.  His head was held back\par
by Rupert's arm, but a convulsive heave went over his whole frame.\par
An instant after his head plunged forward like a bull's,\par
and Rupert Grant was slung head over heels, a catherine wheel of legs,\par
on the floor in front of him.  Simultaneously the bull's head butted\par
Basil in the chest, bringing him also to the ground with a crash,\par
and the monster, with a Berserker roar, leaped at me and knocked\par
me into the corner of the room, smashing the waste-paper basket.\par
The bewildered Greenwood sprang furiously to his feet.\par
Basil did the same.  But they had the best of it now.\par
\par
Greenwood dashed to the bell and pulled it violently, sending peals\par
through the great house.  Before I could get panting to my feet,\par
and before Rupert, who had been literally stunned for a few moments,\par
could even lift his head from the floor, two footmen were in the room.\par
Defeated even when we were in a majority, we were now outnumbered.\par
Greenwood and one of the footmen flung themselves upon me,\par
crushing me back into the corner upon the wreck of the paper basket.\par
The other two flew at Basil, and pinned him against the wall.\par
Rupert lifted himself on his elbow, but he was still dazed.\par
\par
In the strained silence of our helplessness I heard the voice\par
of Basil come with a loud incongruous cheerfulness.\par
\par
"Now this," he said, "is what I call enjoying oneself."\par
\par
I caught a glimpse of his face, flushed and forced against\par
the bookcase, from between the swaying limbs of my captors and his.\par
To my astonishment his eyes were really brilliant with pleasure,\par
like those of a child heated by a favourite game.\par
\par
I made several apoplectic efforts to rise, but the servant was on top\par
of me so heavily that Greenwood could afford to leave me to him.\par
He turned quickly to come to reinforce the two who were mastering Basil.\par
The latter's head was already sinking lower and lower, like a\par
leaking ship, as his enemies pressed him down.  He flung up one hand\par
just as I thought him falling and hung on to a huge tome in the bookcase,\par
a volume, I afterwards discovered, of St Chrysostom's theology.\par
Just as Greenwood bounded across the room towards the group,\par
Basil plucked the ponderous tome bodily out of the shelf, swung it,\par
and sent it spinning through the air, so that it struck Greenwood\par
flat in the face and knocked him over like a rolling ninepin.\par
At the same instant Basil's stiffness broke, and he sank, his enemies\par
closing over him.\par
\par
Rupert's head was clear, but his body shaken; he was hanging\par
as best he could on to the half-prostrate Greenwood.\par
They were rolling over each other on the floor, both somewhat\par
enfeebled by their falls, but Rupert certainly the more so.\par
I was still successfully held down.  The floor was a sea of torn\par
and trampled papers and magazines, like an immense waste-paper basket.\par
Burrows and his companion were almost up to the knees in them,\par
as in a drift of dead leaves.  And Greenwood had his leg stuck right\par
through a sheet of the Pall Mall Gazette, which clung to it ludicrously,\par
like some fantastic trouser frill.\par
\par
Basil, shut from me in a human prison, a prison of powerful bodies,\par
might be dead for all I knew.  I fancied, however, that the broad\par
back of Mr Burrows, which was turned towards me, had a certain bend\par
of effort in it as if my friend still needed some holding down.\par
Suddenly that broad back swayed hither and thither.\par
It was swaying on one leg; Basil, somehow, had hold of the other.\par
Burrows' huge fists and those of the footman were battering Basil's\par
sunken head like an anvil, but nothing could get the giant's ankle out\par
of his sudden and savage grip.  While his own head was forced slowly\par
down in darkness and great pain, the right leg of his captor was being\par
forced in the air.  Burrows swung to and fro with a purple face.\par
Then suddenly the floor and the walls and the ceiling shook together,\par
as the colossus fell, all his length seeming to fill the floor.\par
Basil sprang up with dancing eyes, and with three blows\par
like battering-rams knocked the footman into a cocked hat.\par
Then he sprang on top of Burrows, with one antimacassar in his\par
hand and another in his teeth, and bound him hand and foot almost\par
before he knew clearly that his head had struck the floor.\par
Then Basil sprang at Greenwood, whom Rupert was struggling\par
to hold down, and between them they secured him easily.\par
The man who had hold of me let go and turned to his rescue, but I\par
leaped up like a spring released, and, to my infinite satisfaction,\par
knocked the fellow down.  The other footman, bleeding at the mouth\par
and quite demoralized, was stumbling out of the room.  My late captor,\par
without a word, slunk after him, seeing that the battle was won.\par
Rupert was sitting astride the pinioned Mr Greenwood, Basil astride\par
the pinioned Mr Burrows.\par
\par
To my surprise the latter gentleman, lying bound on his back,\par
spoke in a perfectly calm voice to the man who sat on top of him.\par
\par
"And now, gentlemen," he said, "since you have got your own way,\par
perhaps you wouldn't mind telling us what the deuce all this is?"\par
\par
"This," said Basil, with a radiant face, looking down at his captive,\par
"this is what we call the survival of the fittest."\par
\par
Rupert, who had been steadily collecting himself throughout the latter\par
phases of the fight, was intellectually altogether himself again\par
at the end of it.  Springing up from the prostrate Greenwood,\par
and knotting a handkerchief round his left hand, which was bleeding\par
from a blow, he sang out quite coolly:\par
\par
"Basil, will you mount guard over the captive of your bow and spear\par
and antimacassar?  Swinburne and I will clear out the prison downstairs."\par
\par
"All right," said Basil, rising also and seating himself in a leisured\par
way in an armchair.  "Don't hurry for us," he said, glancing round\par
at the litter of the room, "we have all the illustrated papers."\par
\par
Rupert lurched thoughtfully out of the room, and I followed\par
him even more slowly; in fact, I lingered long enough to hear,\par
as I passed through the room, the passages and the kitchen stairs,\par
Basil's voice continuing conversationally:\par
\par
"And now, Mr Burrows," he said, settling himself sociably in the chair,\par
"there's no reason why we shouldn't go on with that amusing argument.\par
I'm sorry that you have to express yourself lying on your back on\par
the floor, and, as I told you before, I've no more notion why you are\par
there than the man in the moon.  A conversationalist like yourself,\par
however, can scarcely be seriously handicapped by any bodily posture.\par
You were saying, if I remember right, when this incidental\par
fracas occurred, that the rudiments of science might with advantage\par
be made public."\par
\par
"Precisely," said the large man on the floor in an easy tone.\par
"I hold that nothing more than a rough sketch of the universe\par
as seen by science can be..."\par
\par
And here the voices died away as we descended into the basement.\par
I noticed that Mr Greenwood did not join in the amicable controversy.\par
Strange as it may appear, I think he looked back upon our proceedings\par
with a slight degree of resentment.  Mr Burrows, however, was all\par
philosophy and chattiness.  We left them, as I say, together, and sank\par
deeper and deeper into the under-world of that mysterious house,\par
which, perhaps, appeared to us somewhat more Tartarean than it\par
really was, owing to our knowledge of its semi-criminal mystery\par
and of the human secret locked below.\par
\par
The basement floor had several doors, as is usual in such\par
a house; doors that would naturally lead to the kitchen,\par
the scullery, the pantry, the servants' hall, and so on.\par
Rupert flung open all the doors with indescribable rapidity.\par
Four out of the five opened on entirely empty apartments.\par
The fifth was locked.  Rupert broke the door in like a bandbox,\par
and we fell into the sudden blackness of the sealed, unlighted room.\par
\par
Rupert stood on the threshold, and called out like a man calling\par
into an abyss:\par
\par
"Whoever you are, come out.  You are free.  The people who held you\par
captive are captives themselves.  We heard you crying and we came\par
to deliver you.  We have bound your enemies upstairs hand and foot.\par
You are free."\par
\par
For some seconds after he had spoken into the darkness there was a dead\par
silence in it.  Then there came a kind of muttering and moaning.\par
We might easily have taken it for the wind or rats if we had not\par
happened to have heard it before.  It was unmistakably the voice\par
of the imprisoned woman, drearily demanding liberty, just as we\par
had heard her demand it.\par
\par
"Has anybody got a match?" said Rupert grimly.  "I fancy we have\par
come pretty near the end of this business."\par
\par
I struck a match and held it up.  It revealed a large, bare,\par
yellow-papered apartment with a dark-clad figure at the other end\par
of it near the window.  An instant after it burned my fingers\par
and dropped, leaving darkness.  It had, however, revealed something\par
more practical--an iron gas bracket just above my head.\par
I struck another match and lit the gas.  And we found ourselves\par
suddenly and seriously in the presence of the captive.\par
\par
At a sort of workbox in the window of this subterranean breakfast-room\par
sat an elderly lady with a singularly high colour and almost startling\par
silver hair.  She had, as if designedly to relieve these effects,\par
a pair of Mephistophelian black eyebrows and a very neat black dress.\par
The glare of the gas lit up her piquant hair and face perfectly\par
against the brown background of the shutters.  The background was\par
blue and not brown in one place; at the place where Rupert's knife\par
had torn a great opening in the wood about an hour before.\par
\par
"Madam," said he, advancing with a gesture of the hat, "permit me\par
to have the pleasure of announcing to you that you are free.\par
Your complaints happened to strike our ears as we passed down the street,\par
and we have therefore ventured to come to your rescue."\par
\par
The old lady with the red face and the black eyebrows looked at us\par
for a moment with something of the apoplectic stare of a parrot.\par
Then she said, with a sudden gust or breathing of relief:\par
\par
"Rescue?  Where is Mr Greenwood?  Where is Mr Burrows?  Did you say\par
you had rescued me?"\par
\par
"Yes, madam," said Rupert, with a beaming condescension.\par
"We have very satisfactorily dealt with Mr Greenwood and Mr Burrows.\par
We have settled affairs with them very satisfactorily."\par
\par
The old lady rose from her chair and came very quickly towards us.\par
\par
"What did you say to them?  How did you persuade them?" she cried.\par
\par
"We persuaded them, my dear madam," said Rupert, laughing, "by knocking\par
them down and tying them up.  But what is the matter?"\par
\par
To the surprise of every one the old lady walked slowly back to her\par
seat by the window.\par
\par
"Do I understand," she said, with the air of a person about\par
to begin knitting, "that you have knocked down Mr Burrows and\par
tied him up?"\par
\par
"We have," said Rupert proudly; "we have resisted their oppression\par
and conquered it."\par
\par
"Oh, thanks," answered the old lady, and sat down by the window.\par
\par
A considerable pause followed.\par
\par
"The road is quite clear for you, madam," said Rupert pleasantly.\par
\par
The old lady rose, cocking her black eyebrows and her silver crest\par
at us for an instant.\par
\par
"But what about Greenwood and Burrows?" she said.  "What did I\par
understand you to say had become of them?"\par
\par
"They are lying on the floor upstairs," said Rupert, chuckling.\par
"Tied hand and foot."\par
\par
"Well, that settles it," said the old lady, coming with a kind\par
of bang into her seat again, "I must stop where I am."\par
\par
Rupert looked bewildered.\par
\par
"Stop where you are?" he said.  "Why should you stop any longer where\par
you are?  What power can force you now to stop in this miserable cell?"\par
\par
"The question rather is," said the old lady, with composure,\par
"what power can force me to go anywhere else?"\par
\par
We both stared wildly at her and she stared tranquilly at us both.\par
\par
At last I said, "Do you really mean to say that we are to\par
leave you here?"\par
\par
"I suppose you don't intend to tie me up," she said, "and carry me off?\par
I certainly shall not go otherwise."\par
\par
"But, my dear madam," cried out Rupert, in a radiant exasperation,\par
"we heard you with our own ears crying because you could not get out."\par
\par
"Eavesdroppers often hear rather misleading things," replied the\par
captive grimly.  "I suppose I did break down a bit and lose my temper\par
and talk to myself.  But I have some sense of honour for all that."\par
\par
"Some sense of honour?" repeated Rupert, and the last light of\par
intelligence died out of his face, leaving it the face of an idiot\par
with rolling eyes.\par
\par
He moved vaguely towards the door and I followed.  But I turned\par
yet once more in the toils of my conscience and curiosity.\par
"Can we do nothing for you, madam?"  I said forlornly.\par
\par
"Why," said the lady, "if you are particularly anxious to do me\par
a little favour you might untie the gentlemen upstairs."\par
\par
Rupert plunged heavily up the kitchen staircase, shaking it with his\par
vague violence.  With mouth open to speak he stumbled to the door\par
of the sitting-room and scene of battle.\par
\par
"Theoretically speaking, that is no doubt true," Mr Burrows\par
was saying, lying on his back and arguing easily with Basil;\par
"but we must consider the matter as it appears to our sense.\par
The origin of morality..."\par
\par
"Basil," cried Rupert, gasping, "she won't come out."\par
\par
"Who won't come out?" asked Basil, a little cross at being interrupted\par
in an argument.\par
\par
"The lady downstairs," replied Rupert.  "The lady who was locked up.\par
She won't come out.  And she says that all she wants is for us\par
to let these fellows loose."\par
\par
"And a jolly sensible suggestion," cried Basil, and with a bound\par
he was on top of the prostrate Burrows once more and was unknotting\par
his bonds with hands and teeth.\par
\par
"A brilliant idea.  Swinburne, just undo Mr Greenwood."\par
\par
In a dazed and automatic way I released the little gentleman in\par
the purple jacket, who did not seem to regard any of the proceedings\par
as particularly sensible or brilliant.  The gigantic Burrows,\par
on the other hand, was heaving with herculean laughter.\par
\par
"Well," said Basil, in his cheeriest way, "I think we must be\par
getting away.  We've so much enjoyed our evening.  Far too much\par
regard for you to stand on ceremony.  If I may so express myself,\par
we've made ourselves at home.  Good night.  Thanks so much.\par
Come along, Rupert."\par
\par
"Basil," said Rupert desperately, "for God's sake come and see what you\par
can make of the woman downstairs.  I can't get the discomfort out\par
of my mind.  I admit that things look as if we had made a mistake.\par
But these gentlemen won't mind perhaps..."\par
\par
"No, no," cried Burrows, with a sort of Rabelaisian uproariousness.\par
"No, no, look in the pantry, gentlemen.  Examine the coal-hole.\par
Make a tour of the chimneys.  There are corpses all over the house,\par
I assure you."\par
\par
This adventure of ours was destined to differ in one respect\par
from others which I have narrated.  I had been through many wild\par
days with Basil Grant, days for the first half of which the sun\par
and the moon seemed to have gone mad.  But it had almost\par
invariably happened that towards the end of the day and its\par
adventure things had cleared themselves like the sky after rain,\par
and a luminous and quiet meaning had gradually dawned upon me.\par
But this day's work was destined to end in confusion worse confounded.\par
Before we left that house, ten minutes afterwards, one half-witted\par
touch was added which rolled all our minds in cloud.  If Rupert's\par
head had suddenly fallen off on the floor, if wings had begun\par
to sprout out of Greenwood's shoulders, we could scarcely have been\par
more suddenly stricken.  And yet of this we had no explanation.\par
We had to go to bed that night with the prodigy and get up next morning\par
with it and let it stand in our memories for weeks and months.\par
As will be seen, it was not until months afterwards that by another\par
accident and in another way it was explained.  For the present I\par
only state what happened.\par
\par
When all five of us went down the kitchen stairs again, Rupert leading,\par
the two hosts bringing up the rear, we found the door of the prison\par
again closed.  Throwing it open we found the place again as black\par
as pitch.  The old lady, if she was still there, had turned out the gas:\par
she seemed to have a weird preference for sitting in the dark.\par
\par
Without another word Rupert lit the gas again.  The little\par
old lady turned her bird-like head as we all stumbled forward\par
in the strong gaslight.  Then, with a quickness that almost made\par
me jump, she sprang up and swept a sort of old-fashioned curtsey\par
or reverence.  I looked quickly at Greenwood and Burrows, to whom\par
it was natural to suppose this subservience had been offered.\par
I felt irritated at what was implied in this subservience,\par
and desired to see the faces of the tyrants as they received it.\par
To my surprise they did not seem to have seen it at all:\par
Burrows was paring his nails with a small penknife.  Greenwood was\par
at the back of the group and had hardly entered the room.\par
And then an amazing fact became apparent.  It was Basil Grant\par
who stood foremost of the group, the golden gaslight lighting\par
up his strong face and figure.  His face wore an expression\par
indescribably conscious, with the suspicion of a very grave smile.\par
His head was slightly bent with a restrained bow.  It was he who had\par
acknowledged the lady's obeisance.  And it was he, beyond any shadow\par
of reasonable doubt, to whom it had really been directed.\par
\par
"So I hear," he said, in a kindly yet somehow formal voice,\par
"I hear, madam, that my friends have been trying to rescue you.\par
But without success."\par
\par
"No one, naturally, knows my faults better than you," answered the lady\par
with a high colour.  "But you have not found me guilty of treachery."\par
\par
"I willingly attest it, madam," replied Basil, in the same\par
level tones, "and the fact is that I am so much gratified\par
with your exhibition of loyalty that I permit myself the\par
pleasure of exercising some very large discretionary powers.\par
You would not leave this room at the request of these gentlemen.\par
But you know that you can safely leave it at mine."\par
\par
The captive made another reverence.  "I have never complained\par
of your injustice," she said.  "I need scarcely say what I think\par
of your generosity."\par
\par
And before our staring eyes could blink she had passed out of the room,\par
Basil holding the door open for her.\par
\par
He turned to Greenwood with a relapse into joviality.\par
"This will be a relief to you," he said.\par
\par
"Yes, it will," replied that immovable young gentleman with a face\par
like a sphinx.\par
\par
We found ourselves outside in the dark blue night, shaken and dazed\par
as if we had fallen into it from some high tower.\par
\par
"Basil," said Rupert at last, in a weak voice, "I always thought you\par
were my brother.  But are you a man?  I mean--are you only a man?"\par
\par
"At present," replied Basil, "my mere humanity is proved by one of\par
the most unmistakable symbols--hunger.  We are too late for the theatre\par
in Sloane Square.  But we are not too late for the restaurant.\par
Here comes the green omnibus!" and he had leaped on it before\par
we could speak.\par
\par
------------------------------------------------------------------------\par
\par
As I said, it was months after that Rupert Grant suddenly entered\par
my room, swinging a satchel in his hand and with a general air\par
of having jumped over the garden wall, and implored me to go with\par
him upon the latest and wildest of his expeditions.  He proposed\par
to himself no less a thing than the discovery of the actual origin,\par
whereabouts, and headquarters of the source of all our joys and sorrows--\par
the Club of Queer Trades.  I should expand this story for ever if I\par
explained how ultimately we ran this strange entity to its lair.\par
The process meant a hundred interesting things.  The tracking\par
of a member, the bribing of a cabman, the fighting of roughs,\par
the lifting of a paving stone, the finding of a cellar, the finding\par
of a cellar below the cellar, the finding of the subterranean passage,\par
the finding of the Club of Queer Trades.\par
\par
I have had many strange experiences in my life, but never a stranger\par
one than that I felt when I came out of those rambling, sightless,\par
and seemingly hopeless passages into the sudden splendour of a sumptuous\par
and hospitable dining-room, surrounded upon almost every side by faces\par
that I knew.  There was Mr Montmorency, the Arboreal House-Agent,\par
seated between the two brisk young men who were occasionally vicars,\par
and always Professional Detainers.  There was Mr P. G. Northover,\par
founder of the Adventure and Romance Agency.  There was Professor Chadd,\par
who invented the dancing Language.\par
\par
As we entered, all the members seemed to sink suddenly into their chairs,\par
and with the very action the vacancy of the presidential seat gaped\par
at us like a missing tooth.\par
\par
"The president's not here," said Mr P. G. Northover, turning suddenly\par
to Professor Chadd.\par
\par
"N--no," said the philosopher, with more than his ordinary vagueness.\par
"I can't imagine where he is."\par
\par
"Good heavens," said Mr Montmorency, jumping up, "I really feel\par
a little nervous.  I'll go and see."  And he ran out of the room.\par
\par
An instant after he ran back again, twittering with a timid ecstasy.\par
\par
"He's there, gentlemen--he's there all right--he's coming in now,"\par
he cried, and sat down.  Rupert and I could hardly help feeling\par
the beginnings of a sort of wonder as to who this person\par
might be who was the first member of this insane brotherhood.\par
Who, we thought indistinctly, could be maddest in this world of madmen:\par
what fantastic was it whose shadow filled all these fantastics\par
with so loyal an expectation?\par
\par
Suddenly we were answered.  The door flew open and the room was\par
filled and shaken with a shout, in the midst of which Basil Grant,\par
smiling and in evening dress, took his seat at the head of the table.\par
\par
How we ate that dinner I have no idea.  In the common way I am a person\par
particularly prone to enjoy the long luxuriance of the club dinner.\par
But on this occasion it seemed a hopeless and endless string\par
of courses.  Hors-d'oeuvre sardines seemed as big as herrings,\par
soup seemed a sort of ocean, larks were ducks, ducks were ostriches\par
until that dinner was over.  The cheese course was maddening.\par
I had often heard of the moon being made of green cheese.\par
That night I thought the green cheese was made of the moon.\par
And all the time Basil Grant went on laughing and eating and drinking,\par
and never threw one glance at us to tell us why he was there,\par
the king of these capering idiots.\par
\par
At last came the moment which I knew must in some way enlighten us,\par
the time of the club speeches and the club toasts.  Basil Grant\par
rose to his feet amid a surge of songs and cheers.\par
\par
"Gentlemen," he said, "it is a custom in this society that the president\par
for the year opens the proceedings not by any general toast of sentiment,\par
but by calling upon each member to give a brief account of his trade.\par
We then drink to that calling and to all who follow it.\par
It is my business, as the senior member, to open by stating my claim\par
to membership of this club.  Years ago, gentlemen, I was a judge;\par
I did my best in that capacity to do justice and to administer the law.\par
But it gradually dawned on me that in my work, as it was, I was\par
not touching even the fringe of justice.  I was seated in the seat\par
of the mighty, I was robed in scarlet and ermine; nevertheless, I held\par
a small and lowly and futile post.  I had to go by a mean rule as much\par
as a postman, and my red and gold was worth no more than his.\par
Daily there passed before me taut and passionate problems,\par
the stringency of which I had to pretend to relieve by silly\par
imprisonments or silly damages, while I knew all the time, by the light\par
of my living common sense, that they would have been far better\par
relieved by a kiss or a thrashing, or a few words of explanation,\par
or a duel, or a tour in the West Highlands.  Then, as this grew on me,\par
there grew on me continuously the sense of a mountainous frivolity.\par
Every word said in the court, a whisper or an oath,\par
seemed more connected with life than the words I had to say.\par
Then came the time when I publicly blasphemed the whole bosh,\par
was classed as a madman and melted from public life."\par
\par
Something in the atmosphere told me that it was not only Rupert\par
and I who were listening with intensity to this statement.\par
\par
"Well, I discovered that I could be of no real use.  I offered myself\par
privately as a purely moral judge to settle purely moral differences.\par
Before very long these unofficial courts of honour (kept strictly secret)\par
had spread over the whole of society.  People were tried before me not\par
for the practical trifles for which nobody cares, such as committing\par
a murder, or keeping a dog without a licence.  My criminals were\par
tried for the faults which really make social life impossible.\par
They were tried before me for selfishness, or for an impossible vanity,\par
or for scandalmongering, or for stinginess to guests or dependents.\par
Of course these courts had no sort of real coercive powers.\par
The fulfilment of their punishments rested entirely on the honour of\par
the ladies and gentlemen involved, including the honour of the culprits.\par
But you would be amazed to know how completely our orders were\par
always obeyed.  Only lately I had a most pleasing example.\par
A maiden lady in South Kensington whom I had condemned to solitary\par
confinement for being the means of breaking off an engagement\par
through backbiting, absolutely refused to leave her prison,\par
although some well-meaning persons had been inopportune enough\par
to rescue her."\par
\par
Rupert Grant was staring at his brother, his mouth fallen agape.\par
So, for the matter of that, I expect, was I. This, then, was the\par
explanation of the old lady's strange discontent and her still\par
stranger content with her lot.  She was one of the culprits\par
of his Voluntary Criminal Court.  She was one of the clients\par
of his Queer Trade.\par
\par
We were still dazed when we drank, amid a crash of glasses,\par
the health of Basil's new judiciary.  We had only a confused sense\par
of everything having been put right, the sense men will have when they\par
come into the presence of God.  We dimly heard Basil say:\par
\par
"Mr P. G. Northover will now explain the Adventure and Romance Agency."\par
\par
And we heard equally dimly Northover beginning the statement he had\par
made long ago to Major Brown.  Thus our epic ended where it had begun,\par
like a true cycle.\par
\par
\par
THE END\par
\par
}
 