Is Theology The Science of God ?

April 23rd, 2009 

Keith E. D. Buhler  

*"Beloved, let us love one another, for love is from God; and everyone who loves is born of God and knows God. The one who does not love does not know God, for God is love"*
1st John 4:7-8

## Is there a "Science of God"? 

First what do we mean by God? I won't here talk about "religion" because the word “religion” is vague. I don't even know what it means half the time. I know what Human People are, and what Divine People are. Do you know what I mean when I say human being? And do you know what I mean when I say divine being? Let's go with those. 

[There is other concern I should address: Namely, there are many different gods or Divine People claimed and taught by many different human people.  So which god am I talking about when I ask "is there a science of God?" I mean the God revealed by a 1st-Century Jewish Rabbi, born in the backwaters of Nazereth: Yeshua Bar Joseph, son of Mary. This person had very compelling things to say about God. He claimed to know the real God, the creator of everything, and claimed to know what his plans were. He claimed to know the best way to become friends with that supreme Person. The Person Jesus talked about is who I am talking about when I say, “is there a science of God.” I'm talking about the God Jesus called “Father.” But wait. Why should I pick that god when asking if there is a science of God? Why should we concern ourselves with the God revealed by Jesus, and not any other gods, Zeus, Odin, Vishnu, Allah? For one primary reason. He is universally accepted as one of the most important historical teachers about God. I can safely assume in a church group like this that all of you have some personal faith in Jesus and so maybe you are not concerned with this question. But statistically some of you are also having doubts, so let me meet you where you're at and offer this encouragement: Jesus of Nazereth is universally acknowledged as one of the most important philosphers, ethicists, and theologians in human history. The majority consensus takes the day on this. Buddhists know that he was a great teacher and enlightener; Hindu's know that he was divine; Moslem's know he is born of a virgin and one of the greatest of God's prophets in the history of the World; even educated atheists believe he was a wonderful moral teacher, though they may not think very highly of his followers. His followers, who are Christians, have come to trust this remarkable man not only as teacher, prophet, enlightener, and the divine son of God, but as the revelation of God himself, the “fullness of the God head dwelling bodily,” and the “image of his invisible glory,” as Paul teaches. But all agree his revelation of God is worth considering.] So that's who I'm talking about, the Father of Jesus. 

Secondly, what do I mean by Science? I basically mean, “knowledge that scientists have about reality.” "Science" is the most popular word right now for knowledge. Notice that knowledge or science is not a person. Knowledge or science is known by people. So I will try to refrain from talking about "Science" as if it were a person, like "Science teaches this," or "Science has learned that..." Science in this sense is an abstraction. There is only human who learns, and reality that humans learn about. So, scientists are human persons who learn about objective truth. Questions? 

What do scientists learn about? They learn about physics and chemistry, biology and astronomy. These are usually the kinds of things people think about when they hear the term 'science.' Oh, but I'm doing it again, talking about “Science” as if it were a thing. Let me try again. What do physists, chemists, astronomers, and biologists study? They study atoms, chemicals, plant-life, and stars. Fair enough? 

So now we can re-phrase the question, Is there a science of God, in the following way. Are there people who really know about God the Father of Jesus? The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob? Who have objective knowledge of that Divine Person(s)? 

The answer is Yes. The scientists of that science, study the God revealed by Jesus,  get to know him and discover all the facts they can about him, like an astronomer studies stars. Sometimes they make mistakes, but they correct those mistakes and keep learning. Sometimes their theories are false, like when astronomers in the 1910 thought that the core of the Sun was the same temperature as the surface, but Arthur Stanley Eddington's theorized that the core was much hotter, in the The Internal Constitution of the Star in 1926. 

But wait... God is not an external objective verifiable reality, is he? We cannot do experiments on God? Not exactly. But neither can we do experiments on numbers, or ideas, or people. When people say "science" they usually mean visible realities, but not always. For instance, consider the example of physics. Physics is the paradigm science, the model if you will. A lot of physics, if you've studied it at all, is mathematics. Phycists do experiments, but they also spend a lot of time crunching numbers, calculating equations, and puzzling over large sets of numerical data. This is not "observation and verification" in the common way, yet it is still science. Also consider psychology. Psychology can be the study of human behavior, but also the study of the human person. Human persons, their thoughts, feelings, desires, dreams, and personalities cannot be directly observed under a microscope. They are observed in relationship. When you want to study someone's thoughts, you have to ask them. You can't cut their brain open and find out whether they're thinking about a red circle or about lunch. When you want to study someone's dreams you can't observe it externally, you have to ask. Or, of course, you can look inside yourself. Psychology asks questions like, "What motivates people to do what they do?" Well, a great way to ansewr this question is to ask, "What motivates me to do what I do?" Then, if you are very careful and observe and study long enough, you may come to some knowledge about this. For instance, psychologists teach us that human beings are consistently motivated by a desire to be accepted by other people. This is a deliverance of the Science of Human Beings, if you will. It is true, and scientifically so, though it was not learned in a lab as much as learned in relationships. 

Similarly with the Science of God. In summary thus far, science is knowledge about reality, any reality --  God is a real Person out there, and the Science of God is coming to know him. 

There are some things about God that we may learn "objectively,"  if you like. And others we have to learn in relationship. Sometimes we can learn "about" God. And sometimes we have to know God himself as a friend or parent. We must in fact do both. Just like I need to get to know my friend, but also know where they're from, and the color of their eyes. Both knowledge of, and knowledge about, constitutes a good friendship. For instance, something you can learn about God is that he is good. This is something that Theologians teach us, and it is true of God. You don't have to know him very well to know this about him. 

Another thing that Jesus taught us was that God is three Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. This is visible in Matthew 3 when Jesus is baptized, the Father speaks from heaven, and the Holy Spirit descends as a dove. Jesus also says that he and his Father are one, meaning share one essence. The Trinity is a Fact of reality that Scientists have learned from observing God in relationship with Him, and testing what they see. It is confirmed and verified thousands of times by individuals who undertake the difficult task of understanding God. 

So I hope I've convinced you that God is a reality, a fact that we can learn objective truth about. Just like math, philosophy, and psychology, he is an intelligible but not a visible fact. And just like psychology, he is a factual Person not an impersonal fact. 

I'll pause for questions and then pick up with two more questions. 

## So how do we learn the science of God?  

If you buy the argument that there is a science of God, that God is objectively knowable and publicly verifiable, then this is the question you might be curious about. 
1. Obey his commandments. The first and greatest commandment is to love God; the second is like it: love others as yourself.  Jesus said, "If you love me, keep my commandments." (John 14:15) Also, in the Sermon on the Mount he said, "Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God." You have to see God to know him, just like you have to see the stars to know them. 
  Psalm 119: 97 
    O how I love Your law!          It is my meditation all the day.     98Your commandments make me wiser than my enemies,          For they are ever mine.     99I have more insight than all my teachers,          For Your testimonies are my meditation.     100I understand more than the aged,          Because I have observed Your precepts.     101I have restrained my feet from every evil way,          That I may keep Your word.     102I have not turned aside from Your ordinances,          For You Yourself have taught me.     103How sweet are Your words to my taste!          Yes, sweeter than honey to my mouth!     104From Your precepts I get understanding;          Therefore I hate every false way. 
2. Trust the experts. In order to learn the science regarding the God revealed by Jesus, we must listen to expert scientists. If you want to learn Relativity, trust Einstein and learn from him about gravity, time, and light. If you want to learn physics, trust and learn from Brian Greene about atoms, strings, and quarks. If you want to learn about the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, trust and learn from Jesus and his best students, John, Peter, James, Paul, about God's thoughts, his plans, his nature.  
3. Work hard.  
III. Why do so few people believe this? 
You may at this point be totally convinced, totally confused, or interested but needing more. You may be asking: Why do many Americans believe Science is a "mind thing" and Faith is a "heart thing"? Why do typically believe that stars are something you know by science, and God is something you know by faith? Why don't some people believe Christian Theology is scientific? 
The answer to this involves a war going on between the two worldviews, Christian and a variety of non-Christian worldviews.  As Chuck Colson says, "The real war is a cosmic struggle between worldviews -- between the Christian worldview and the various secular and spiritual worldviews arrayed against it." (Colson, xiii)  This is a spiritual war between the fallen angels who want to deceive us, and God, his servants, and the angels who want to help us learn the truth. We are all in the middle of this struggle.  
A few truths that should help us: It is sometimes said that Christianiaty is a fine religious story whereas Science is a hard scientific fact. This could not be further from the truth. Both side have a myth or story of the universe; and both have hard scientific facts to deal with. 
For our purposes I will narrow in on the vaguely Scientific Outlook, what Lewis calls, "Wellsianity" after HG Wells. We might call it Carlianity after Carl Sagan. This is the view taught by The Discovery Channel, most High School Text Books, and Disney movies like Fantasia.  Let me explain: 
    Both sides have a scientific framework. "We must convince people that the debate is not about the Bible vs science. The debates is about pursuing an unbiased examination of the scientific facts and following those facts wherever they may lead." (Colson 23)         We must learn the scientific framework of each. Let me give you two reasons to think that the Christian scientific framework is true whereas the Non-Christian one is false scientifically.  First, we have a better explanation for agree that the world had a beginning.              The second law of thermodynamics, the law of decay "implies that the universe is in a process of gradual disintegration... The universe is running down, like a wound-up clock. And if it is running down, then there must have been a time when it was wound up." (Colson 32)             The first law of thermodynamics, the law of conservation of matter, "implies that matter cannot just pop into existence or create itself." (Colson 33)             "We should not oppose science with religion. We should oppose bad science with better science." (Colson 37)      Secondly, we have a better explanation of human science in the first place.  CS Lewis says, "Long before I believed Theology to be true I had already decided that the popular scientific picture at any rate was false. One absolutely central inconsistency ruins it... the whole picture professes to depend on inferences from observed facts. Unless the inference is valid, the whole picture disappears. Unless we can be sure that in reality the remotest nebula or the remotest part obeys the thought-laws of the human scientists here and now in his labratory -- in other words, unless Reason is an absolute -- all is in ruins. Yet those who ask me to believe this world picutre also ask me to believe that Reason is simply the unforeseen and unintended bye-product of mindless matter at one stage of its endless and aimless becoming. Here is flat contradiction. They ask me at the same moment to accept a conclusion and to discredit the only testimony on which that conclusion can be based." (Weight of Glory)  Both sides have a story (or a myth)         In the beginning, God created the heavens and the earth. Man fell, Jesus Christ became incarnate and redeemed mankind. He will return at the fullness of time and set things to rights.          Did you know their is a secular story as well? Keat's Hyperion & Wagner's Nibelung's Ring are pre-Darwinian renditions of this myth.  It goes: "In the beginning were the particles, "along with blind, purposeless natural laws... Nature created the universe out of nothing through a quantum fluctuation." (Colson 19)        Quote (Lewis 123)          I'll close with a quotation from CS Lewis: 
"The proof or verification of my Christian answer to the cosmic sum is this. When I accept Theology I may find difficulties, at this point or that, in harmonizing it with some particular truths which are imbedded in the mythical cosmology derived from science. But I can get in, or allow for, sciences as a whole. Granted that Reason is prior to matter and that the light of that primal Reason illuminates finite minds, I can understand how men should come by observation and inference, to know a lot about the universe they live in. If, on the other hand, I swallow the scientific cosmology as a whole, then not only can I not fit in Christianity, but I cannot even fit in science. If minds are dependent wholly on brains, and brains on biochemistry, and biochemistry (in the long run) on the meaningless flux of atoms, I cannot understand how the thought of those minds should have any more significance than the sound of the wind in the trees."  
Close with Lewis 138: 