layout: post
title: Writings
---

# Writings #

You can read some of my writings below. 
 
The most important thing I'm writing right now is my dissertation. 

Second to this is my blog, the [Intentional Reading Project](http://www.readingintentionally.com/)  The goal is to help you define your reading goals and achieve them. 
 
I am a devout amateur. I believe you should write and create lots of different things even if you can't or don't or don't want to make money with them. Just create. So here are some articles, short stories, fairy tales, screenplays, and satire. 
 
My non-academic writings have been published on line and in print at MereOrthodoxy, The Examined Life, the London School of Training, The Word, and others. 


 
 
#Short Stories, Fables, and Fairy Tales
Redwood (short fiction)
The Face of God (short fiction)
The Death of Renfield (short fiction)​
Gorge and the Ice God (sci-fi)
Yapha Poesis Ivinitus: A Short Myth of Language​
The Giving Well: A fairy tale
Fables on Leading & Following  (fables) 
The Sin of Satan: A Dialogue on the Problem of Evil (dialogue)

#Fiction: Short Stories
The Face of God 
The Death of Renfield

#Books
Sola Scriptura: A Dialogue
#Screenplays
Aedis Diana
The Hispanola Vampire: Amelia
The Hispanola Vampire: Bobadilla
Misha and Liz (short film)
G8: The Last War (feature film)
#Articles Non-Fiction
Friends with Holiness: My St Stephen's Residency (in Orthodox Word)
Review of Rage Against God by Peter Hitchins (in Examined Life)
Who Cares? Learning through discussion (in Examined Life)
The Courage to Witness: Reflections on martyrdom (in Examined Life)
When My Breath Stops: Lungs and Mortality (forthcoming in St. Katherine Review)
#Poetry
The Boy and the Poem
Lake Lumen
Wisconsin Winter
 
#Humor/Satire
I am American
2014 College Budget Completely Cuts Faculty Salary
College Student Might Give Professor a "2" 
Google Acquires U.S. Government
Woman Finds Man of her Dreams
On Bad Words
Henry and Janet's Big Day
 
#Film and Music Criticism
Andrei Tarkovsky's Ivan's Childhood (from Examined Life)
Paul Simon's Graceland (from Examined Life)
