# Beard #

**How to grow a beard in 3 easy steps**

# 1. Be Born a Male. #
This is the first and in many ways the easiest step. Your parents do all the work by having sex. Your part is simply to implant in the uterine wall, gestate for a lunar year, and descend out of your mother’s body. 

This step is also the easiest to mess up. If you are born a female, steps 2-3 just won’t work for you. There are ways of getting a beard but... give up now. 

## 2. Go through Puberty. ##
This step is hard. It is not hard technically to *do*. Puberty is something done to you by benevolent but pitiless hand of Father God and Mother Nature. 

You have to wait through pimples, uneven limb size, emotional psychosis, and social awkwardness. You have to develop the vague (but now unshakable feeling) that perhaps life is meaningless. 

At this point, your body will begin producing the chemicals needed to grow that beard. This may take a year, a couple of years, or up to a decade. Your job is, again, to wait. 

## 3. Do Not Commit Beardicide ## 
Three words. Do. Not. Shave. This is the hardest step to do, mostly because it is the first where you actually *do* something. 

Don't Destroy the Beard. 

That typically translates to "do not shave." However, also do not put your chin too close to candles. Do not rub seeds into your beard and fall asleep near a horde of hungry hamsters. 

If you follow these 3 steps a beard will appear on your face. You will stop avoiding what Nature has so generously gifted you. 

## Replies to Objections  ##

Some men will object they they "can't" grow a beard. You mean you can't grow a full, lush beard. But there is no perfect beard. Just *your* beard. If you naturally grow a fu-man-chu, then rock it. 

Some men will object that bearded men are not as "kissable." But these are usually advertisers trying to sell you overpriced razors. Ignore such plaintive cries from the non-bearded. 

Some women will object that bearded men are not as "kissable". Do not date these women. 

Some young boys will object that they "can't" grow a beard yet. But they also break rule #3. If you follow rule #1-2 **and** #3, a beard will eventually appear. Wait, my son. Always two there are. A master, and an apprentice. Hear my words. Wait. 