---
title: Markdown for Websites
layout: posts
---

# Markdown For Websites  #

One of my students is experimenting with Markdown. I recommended Texts.io for writing academic papers because the visual editor is quasi-WYSIWYG and the output (or compile or "export") function is really easy. 

I thought I'd explain in this post how to get started creating a website. 

There are a lot of good tutorials on creating a blog or website using Markdown, Github, and Jekyll. Some of these, however, assume a bit of programming knowledge. Since I had no previous programming knowledge I thought I could explain things (hopefully) more clearly. 

I have certainly needed to learn a few basics. The rule of thumb is: when things don't work, try again. Trial and error is the gold standard of self-teaching programming (and anything else). 

## Markdown (Content) ##

1. First, play with Markdown. Markdown is a simple (the simplest?) way to mark up plain text that will later be translated into code, such as a doc file, HTML, Latex, ePub, even PDF. 

## Github (Host) 

2. Second, set up a [Github](https://github.com/) account. You can pick any username, but I recommend making your username similar or identical to the URL you eventually want to be your website. So, for example, my website is www.keithbuhler.com. I chose "keithbuhler" as my Github username. (This is not strictly necessary; it is possible to change your Github username, if you need to.)
3. Create the account, sign in, confirm etc. 
4. Go to your "repositories" tab and create "New".
5. Set the repository name to be IDENTICAL to your username. 
6. Create a brief description (i.e., "website first try!")
6. Mark it public. (The only way to get a private Github repository is to pay.)
7. Initialize with a Readme. 
8. Create repository. 

## Jekyll 


