--- 
title: Restoring the Liberal Arts -- Part I
layout: single
share: true
header:
      image: http://www.keithbuhler.com/images/banner-buhler-report.svg
share: true
comments: true
tags: [classical education]
categories: [Classical education]
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
permalink: 
---

![header]

For the past twenty years or so, I’ve been trying to understand this concept of “Liberal Arts.” I don't think I fully understand it yet. And I don't think you do either. 

One would hope 

I went to a “Liberal Arts” university (Biola), majored in Humanities, the Great Books at the Torrey Honors Institute. 

My first teaching job was introducing high school students to the “Great Conversation” through Great Books. 

I’ve been involved in multiple schools and non-profits aimed at restoring the liberal arts in American culture, rebuilding Western Civilization. 

I studied theology and philosophy at the graduate level, earning a master's in both and a doctorate in philosophy. I wrote a book-length dissertation about ethics and Aristotle within a framework of contemporary scientific naturalism. 

And yet I'm still not certain that I know what the term 'liberal arts' even means. And I'm certain that not many people who use the term know what it means. 

Perhaps even the fundamental question of what liberal arts *are* is more difficult than we realize. 

If a college labels itself as a "Liberal Arts" institution (as opposed to a "research" institution), they might mean no more by that than that they value a smattering of different subjects. Wikipedia defines the goal of liberal arts colelges as being to "impart a broad general knowledge and develop general intellectual capacities, in contrast to a professional, vocational, or technical curriculum." Liberal arts often stands for "general" knowledge as against specialized knowledge; or humanities as against STEM; or abstract, genteel, white-collar subjects as against concrete, blue collar subjects. 

But these vagueries are insufficient in the minds of an educator. One would expect clear answers to fundamental questions such as: how many liberal arts are there? What distinguishes them from other arts? Where did they begin and how did they evolve, if they evolved at all? Is mathematics a liberal art? How about physics? If "grammar" is a traditional liberal art, then why don't liberal arts schools teach grammar? 

My football coach used to say that "it's all about fundamentals." Today, sport commentators in the National Football League say the same thing just about every week. 

In education, it's all about the fundamentals: What is education? What is its true nature and purpose? What methods or strategies are universal and what methods are particular to the group of students toward which they are aimed?

My goal in this first part of the series is to suggest that we don't very well know the fundamentals.  In later parts, I want to offer a brief answer to the question of what liberal arts are and why they matter. 

## Discussion questions ##

Did you go to a "liberal arts" school? Did they teach you what liberal arts are? Or did they just offer a smattering of knowledge from the humanities and sciences? 




