--- 
title: Reflections on Norm MacDonald
layout: single
share: true
header:
      image: http://www.keithbuhler.com/images/banner-buhler-report.svg
share: true
comments: true
tags: [Culture]
categories: [culture, humor]
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
permalink: 
---

![header]


I just read Norm MacDonald's "Based on a True Story." (Good Christmas gift!)

While I can't publicly recommend it because of the seedy content (drug use, gambling, and fornication), I will share that it was hilarious qua ridiculous psuedo-memoir as well as thought-provoking qua literature. (Who is the ghostwriter? Isn't life, in the end, an all-or-nothing gamble?)

It's also sad that his life has been... well, not very meaningful.

Unexpected was an incredibly tragedy in the first few chapters (I actually choked up reading it) when he sets up and makes a casual punchline out of his experience being molested by an older man when he was 8-years old. You can't just drop that as a punchline, Norm!

There are enough sexual abuse victims in my family for me to know just how deeply he was injured by this, and to speculate that he has spent a life and career never healing from that injury.

It's strange. It seems to me that some comedians seem to be effective fools (think court jesters) but also competent human beings who are self-controlled with pleasure. Gaffigan, maybe. Brian Regan, maybe. My generation of comedians growing up were dudes like Steve Martin, who is still doing good work and seems (for all I know) to be a decent human being.

Some seemed consumed by their fame and overindulgence in madness: Jim Carrey, perhaps. Mitch Hedberg, definitely.

Some, like Cosby, fall from grace because of immoderation and vice. But it was never part of his comedy.

Others, like Louis C.K., Artie Lange, Norm MacDonald *make their comedy about their own horrifying lack of character.* That's the joke. "I'm such a bad person, isn't it hilarious? No really, I'm this bad off stage as well!"

Why is it that these modern comedians sacrifice their life and happiness at the altar of being funny? Is it that the funniest thing possible is not jokes or stories about fools, but watching a fool throw his actual life away in folly? If so, are the laughs worth it?
