---
title: Notion (part 1)
layout: single
permalink: /notion1/
categories: 
comments: true
author_profile: false
share: true
header:
    image: 
    teaser: 
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
--- 


One full week into August Bradley's system using Notion.so to organize my daily tasks, weekly and monthly projects, and long-term goals, outcomes, and lifelong commitments. 

I must say I was more productive than previous weeks but more importantly *less stressed* and less overworked at the end of a good day. 

My projects list is organized, and manageable for the first time in, well, ever. 

I have all my projects categorized and tagged by priority, by due date, by whether or not it's started, by "do date" (date when I choose to do it even if it's not "due"), and my own numbering system. I have 36 projects in total which sounds like a lot, but a "project" just means any task that is two or more steps to complete. And these projects span from today to June. So having them all laid out and broken into actionable next steps allows me to work steadily (be the tortoise!) on the most important ones, because I should not wait -- and it quiets the less important or future-dated projects because they *can* wait. 

This could be huge. 

My daily to do list ("TO DO TODAY"), on the other hand, is auto-populated each day with the tasks I've defined before had as "to do that day." My to do list has a drop down for "today," and "tomorrow" and "next week" and then a calendar view. The calendar view is a game changer because  I can pick a day (say, 7 days from now), schedule a task, and when that day arrives it autopopulates on my "to do today" list. No transferring from Google Cal, no using two to do lists, etc. 

I'm still learning his system for keeping notes and "mind vault" but we'll see if it helps too.
