--- 
title: Two poems for my kids
layout: single
share: true
header:
      image: http://www.keithbuhler.com/images/banner-buhler-report.svg
share: true
comments: true
tags: []
categories: [philosophy]
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
permalink: 
---


Two poems I wrote for the kids, commissioned *by* the kids. I asked them for a prompt. Josiah naturally asked for Hamsters. Evelyn for fairies in the forest.


**Hamster poem (Josiah, age 12)**

In a pile of blankets, you glance 
And see a flash of motion. 
You must be quick for a chance 
Of gathering a notion
Of the hamster dance. They run 
and jump and hide in tunnels, 
Tucked and folded for fun!
They’ll hide before anyone’ll
Can guess their hamster names! 
Chirping, squeak! Josiah comes!
Everyone play dumb or sleep!
Master never, ever plumbs
Our depths, how deep we creep!
We squall, and roll, and feed our face
On every seed and crumb 
That even though we walk with grace
We seem so simple and dumb
He’ll never guess our games!


**Fairies in forest (Evelyn, age 10)**

Hyacinth of purple and pink adorn
The path, dappled each side with green and grey,
But roses white appear as gold each morn 
When Master Sun rises to shine his rays. 
At night, starlight alone adorns her head, 
(Unless light of Moon softly paints the lass,)
A pillow of darling daisies ‘neath her bed
And winds whispering through the downy grass. 
Moss, tangled roots, brown leaves festoon
The meadow wherein she sleeps with the blessed; 
Brightly lit fairies dance and sing a tune
With words that when she wakes she cannot guess. 
She rests in joy — her golden hair her down — 
A dozen lily fairies are her crown.
